=== PDF pages 71-77 (printed 56-62) ===
   When N0  k / G, the fixed point at n * = 0 is stable. This means that there is no
stimulated emission and the laser acts like a lamp. As the pump strength N0 is
increased, the system undergoes a transcritical bifurcation when N0 = k / G. For
N0  k / G, the origin loses stability and a stable fixed point appears at
 n* = (GN 0 − k ) BG > 0 , corresponding to spontaneous laser action. Thus
N0 = k / G can be interpreted as the laser threshold in this model. Figure 3.3.3 sum-
marizes our results.

                  n                                               laser




                          lamp
                  0
                                                             N0
                                 k/G


                  Figure 3.3.3


   Although this model correctly predicts the existence of a threshold, it ignores
the dynamics of the excited atoms, the existence of spontaneous emission, and
several other complications. See Exercises 3.3.1 and 3.3.2 for improved models.


3.4     Pitchfork Bifurcation
We turn now to a third kind of bifurcation, the so-called pitchfork bifurcation.
This bifurcation is common in physical problems that have a symmetry. For exam-
ple, many problems have a spatial symmetry between left and right. In such cases,
fixed points tend to appear and disappear in symmetrical pairs. In the buckling
example of Figure 3.0.1, the beam is stable in the vertical position if the load is
small. In this case there is a stable fixed point corresponding to zero deflection. But
if the load exceeds the buckling threshold, the beam may buckle to either the left or
the right. The vertical position has gone unstable, and two new symmetrical fixed
points, corresponding to left- and right-buckled configurations, have been born.
    There are two very different types of pitchfork bifurcation. The simpler type is
called supercritical, and will be discussed first.

         Supercritical Pitchfork Bifurcation
The normal form of the supercritical pitchfork bifurcation is

         x = rx − x3 .                                                   (1)




56        BIFURCATIONS
Note that this equation is invariant under the change of variables x l x. That
is, if we replace x by x and then cancel the resulting minus signs on both sides of
the equation, we get (1) back again. This invariance is the mathematical expression
of the left-right symmetry mentioned earlier. (More technically, one says that the
vector field is equivariant, but we’ll use the more familiar language.)
    Figure 3.4.1 shows the vector field for different values of r.
           ẋ                              ẋ                             ẋ




                         x                             x                              x




        (a) r < 0                      (b) r = 0                       (c) r > 0


Figure 3.4.1


When r  0, the origin is the only fixed point, and it is stable. When r = 0, the origin
is still stable, but much more weakly so, since the linearization vanishes. Now solu-
tions no longer decay exponentially fast—instead the decay is a much slower alge-
braic function of time (recall Exercise 2.4.9). This lethargic decay is called critical
slowing down in the physics literature. Finally, when r  0, the origin has become
unstable. Two new stable fixed points appear on either side of the origin, symmet-
rically located at x* = ± r .
    The reason for the term “pitchfork” becomes clear when we plot the bifurcation
diagram (Figure 3.4.2). Actually, pitchfork trifurcation might be a better word!

                                       x

                                                                 stable




                stable                                           unstable
                                                            r


                                                                 stable




                Figure 3.4.2




                                                3.4 PITCHFORK BIFURCATION            57
EXAMPLE 3.4.1:

Equations similar to x = −x + C tanh x arise in statistical mechanical models of
magnets and neural networks (see Exercise 3.6.7 and Palmer 1989). Show that
this equation undergoes a supercritical pitchfork bifurcation as C is varied. Then
give a numerically accurate plot of the fixed points for each C.
    Solution: We use the strategy of Example 3.1.2 to find the fixed points. The
graphs of y = x and y = C tanh x are shown in Figure 3.4.3; their intersections cor-
respond to fixed points. The key thing to realize is that as C increases, the tanh
curve becomes steeper at the origin (its slope there is C ). Hence for C  1 the origin
is the only fixed point. A pitchfork bifurcation occurs at C = 1, x * = 0, when the
tanh curve develops a slope of 1 at the origin. Finally, when C  1, two new stable
fixed points appear, and the origin becomes unstable.

                    x


                        β tanh x
                   x                              x                                   x




        β<1                            β=1                            β>1

Figure 3.4.3


    Now we want to compute the fixed points x * for each C. Of course, one fixed
point always occurs at x * = 0; we are looking for the other, nontrivial fixed points.
One approach is to solve the equation x * = C tanh x * numerically, using the
Newton–Raphson method or some other root-finding scheme. (See Press et
al. (2007) for a friendly and informative discussion of numerical methods.) But
                                              there’s an easier way, which comes
      6                                       from changing our point of view.
      4                                       Instead of studying the dependence
                                              of x * on C, we think of x * as the
      2
                                              independent variable, and then com-
x 0                                           pute C = x * / tanh x *. This gives us a
    -2
                                              table  of pairs ( x *, C). For each pair,
                                              we plot C horizontally and x * verti-
    -4                                        cally. This yields the bifurcation dia-
     -6                                   β gram (Figure 3.4.4).
        0     1       2       3       4          The shortcut used here exploits
                                              the fact that f ( x, C ) = x C tanh x
Figure 3.4.4
                                              depends more simply on C than on x.



58         BIFURCATIONS
This is frequently the case in bifurcation problems—the dependence on the con-
trol parameter is usually simpler than the dependence on x. ■


EXAMPLE 3.4.2:

Plot the potential V ( x ) for the system x = rx − x3 , for the cases r  0, r = 0, and
r  0.
    Solution: Recall from Section 2.7 that the potential for x  f ( x ) is defined by
f ( x ) = dV / dx. Hence we need to solve dV / dx = rx  x 3 . Integration yields
V ( x ) = − 12 rx 2 + 14 x 4 , where we neglect the arbitrary constant of integration.
The corresponding graphs are shown in Figure 3.4.5.

        V                               V                               V




                   x                               x                                  x




         r<0                            r=0                             r>0

Figure 3.4.5


When r  0, there is a quadratic minimum at the origin. At the bifurcation value
r = 0, the minimum becomes a much flatter quartic. For r  0, a local maximum
appears at the origin, and a symmetric pair of minima occur to either side of it. ■

         Subcritical Pitchfork Bifurcation
   In the supercritical case x = rx − x3 discussed above, the cubic term is stabiliz-
ing: it acts as a restoring force that pulls x ( t ) back toward x = 0. If instead the
cubic term were destabilizing, as in

         x = rx + x3 ,                                                     (2)
then we’d have a subcritical pitchfork bifurcation. Figure 3.4.6 shows the bifurca-
tion diagram.




                                            3.4 PITCHFORK BIFURCATION                59
                                        x

             unstable




               stable                                           unstable
                                                           r

             unstable




             Figure 3.4.6


Compared to Figure 3.4.2, the pitchfork is inverted. The nonzero fixed points
 x* = ± −r are unstable, and exist only below the bifurcation ( r  0), which moti-
vates the term “subcritical.” More importantly, the origin is stable for r  0 and
unstable for r  0, as in the supercritical case, but now the instability for r  0
is not opposed by the cubic term—in fact the cubic term lends a helping hand in
driving the trajectories out to infinity! This effect leads to blow-up: one can show
that x(t ) → ±∞ in finite time, starting from any initial condition x0 v 0
(Exercise 2.5.3).
    In real physical systems, such an explosive instability is usually opposed by the
stabilizing influence of higher-order terms. Assuming that the system is still sym-
metric under x l x, the first stabilizing term must be x 5. Thus the canonical
example of a system with a subcritical pitchfork bifurcation is

         x = rx + x3 − x5 .                                               (3)
There’s no loss in generality in assuming that the coefficients of x 3 and x 5 are 1
(Exercise 3.5.8).
                                            The detailed analysis of (3) is left to
x
                                         you (Exercises 3.4.14 and 3.4.15). But
                                         we will summarize the main results
                                         here. Figure 3.4.7 shows the bifurca-
                                         tion diagram for (3). For small x, the
 0
         rs              0            r  picture looks just like Figure 3.4.6: the
                                         origin is locally stable for r  0, and
                                         two backward-bending branches of
                                         unstable fixed points bifurcate from
                                         the origin when r = 0. The new feature,
Figure 3.4.7                             due to the x 5 term, is that the unstable


60        BIFURCATIONS
branches turn around and become stable at r = rs , where rs  0. These stable
large-amplitude branches exist for all r  rs.
There are several things to note about Figure 3.4.7:
        1. In the range rs  r  0, two qualitatively different stable states coex-
           ist, namely the origin and the large-amplitude fixed points. The initial
           condition x0 determines which fixed point is approached as t l d.
           One consequence is that the origin is stable to small perturbations,
           but not to large ones—in this sense the origin is locally stable, but not
           globally stable.
        2. The existence of different stable states allows for the possibility of
           jumps and hysteresis as r is varied. Suppose we start the system in the
           state x* = 0, and then slowly increase the parameter r (indicated by
           an arrow along the r-axis of Figure 3.4.8).

                      x



                      0
                              rs                0            r




                      Figure 3.4.8


            Then the state remains at the origin until r = 0, when the origin loses
            stability. Now the slightest nudge will cause the state to jump to one
            of the large-amplitude branches. With further increases of r, the state
            moves out along the large-amplitude branch. If r is now decreased, the
            state remains on the large-amplitude branch, even when r is decreased
            below 0! We have to lower r even further (down past rs ) to get the state
            to jump back to the origin. This lack of reversibility as a parameter is
            varied is called hysteresis.
         3. The bifurcation at rs is a saddle-node bifurcation, in which stable
            and unstable fixed points are born “out of the clear blue sky” as r is
            increased (see Section 3.1).


         Terminology
   As usual in bifurcation theory, there are several other names for the bifur-
cations discussed here. The supercritical pitchfork is sometimes called a forward
bifurcation, and is closely related to a continuous or second-order phase transition


                                         3.4 PITCHFORK BIFURCATION                61
in statistical mechanics. The subcritical bifurcation is sometimes called an inverted
or backward bifurcation, and is related to discontinuous or first-order phase tran-
sitions. In the engineering literature, the supercritical bifurcation is sometimes
called soft or safe, because the nonzero fixed points are born at small ampli-
tude; in contrast, the subcritical bifurcation is hard or dangerous, because of
the jump from zero to large amplitude.


3.5 Overdamped Bead on a Rotating Hoop
In this section we analyze a classic problem from first-year physics, the bead on a
rotating hoop. This problem provides an example of a bifurcation in a mechanical
system. It also illustrates the subtleties involved in replacing Newton’s law, which
is a second-order equation, by a simpler first-order equation.
    The mechanical system is shown in Figure 3.5.1. A bead of mass m slides along
a wire hoop of radius r. The hoop is constrained to rotate at a constant angular
velocity X about its vertical axis. The problem is to analyze the motion of the bead,
given that it is acted on by both gravitational and centrifugal forces. This is the
                        usual statement of the problem, but now we want to add a
               ω        new twist: suppose that there’s also a frictional force on the
                        bead that opposes its motion. To be specific, imagine that
                        the whole system is immersed in a vat of molasses or some
                        other very viscous fluid, and that the friction is due to viscous
                        damping.
                   m       Let G be the angle between the bead and the downward
                        vertical direction. By convention, we restrict G to the range
                        Q  G b Q, so there’s only one angle for each point on the
                        hoop. Also, let S = r sinG denote the distance of the bead
Figure 3.5.1            from the vertical axis. Then the coordinates are as shown in
                        Figure 3.5.2.
                           Now we write Newton’s law for the bead. There’s a down-
                       ward gravitational force mg, a sideways centrifugal force
                       mS X2, and a tangential damping force bG.     (The constants g
          φ    r
                       and b are taken to be positive; negative signs will be added
             ρ         later as needed.) The hoop is assumed to be rigid, so we only
                       have to resolve the forces along the tangential direction, as
Figure 3.5.2
                       shown in Figure 3.5.3. After substituting S = r sinG in the cen-
                       trifugal term, and recalling that the tangential acceleration is
   we obtain the governing equation
 rG,

          mrφ = −bφ − mg sin φ + mrω 2 sin φ cos φ.                      (1)




62         BIFURCATIONS

=== PDF pages 85-89 (printed 70-74) ===
         A Singular Limit
   The difficulty we have encountered here occurs throughout science and engi-
neering. In some limit of interest (here, the limit of strong damping), the term con-
taining the highest order derivative drops out of the governing equation. Then the
initial conditions or boundary conditions can’t be satisfied. Such a limit is often
called singular. For example, in fluid mechanics, the limit of high Reynolds num-
ber is a singular limit; it accounts for the presence of extremely thin “boundary
layers” in the flow over airplane wings. In our problem, the rapid transient played
the role of a boundary layer—it is a thin layer of time that occurs near the bound-
ary t = 0.
   The branch of mathematics that deals with singular limits is called singular
perturbation theory. See Jordan and Smith (1987) or Lin and Segel (1988) for an
introduction. Another problem with a singular limit will be discussed briefly in
Section 7.5.


3.6     Imperfect Bifurcations and Catastrophes
As we mentioned earlier, pitchfork bifurcations are common in problems that
have a symmetry. For example, in the problem of the bead on a rotating hoop
(Section 3.5), there was a perfect symmetry between the left and right sides of
the hoop. But in many real-world circumstances, the symmetry is only approxi-
mate—an imperfection leads to a slight difference between left and right. We
now want to see what happens when such imperfections are present.
   For example, consider the system

         x = h + rx − x3 .                                               (1)
If h = 0, we have the normal form for a supercritical pitchfork bifurcation, and
there’s a perfect symmetry between x and x. But this symmetry is broken when
h v 0; for this reason we refer to h as an imperfection parameter.
   Equation (1) is a bit harder to analyze than other bifurcation problems we’ve
considered previously, because we have two independent parameters to worry
about ( h and r ). To keep things straight, we’ll think of r as fixed, and then examine
the effects of varying h. The first step is to analyze the fixed points of (1). These
can be found explicitly, but we’d have to invoke the messy formula for the roots
of a cubic equation. It’s clearer to use a graphical approach, as in Example 3.1.2.
We plot the graphs of y = rx  x 3 and y = h on the same axes, and look for
intersections (Figure 3.6.1). These intersections occur at the fixed points of (1).
When r b 0, the cubic is monotonically decreasing, and so it intersects the hori-
zontal line y = h in exactly one point (Figure 3.6.1a). The more interesting case is
r  0; then one, two, or three intersections are possible, depending on the value of
h (Figure 3.6.1b).



70        BIFURCATIONS
     y = rx − x3
                                                                             |h| > hc (r)
                                 y = −h                                      |h| = hc (r)
                                                                             |h| < hc (r)
                                  x                                          x




                (a) r ≤ 0                                   (b) r > 0

    Figure 3.6.1


   The critical case occurs when the horizontal line is just tangent to either the
local minimum or maximum of the cubic; then we have a saddle-node bifurcation.
To find the values of h at which this bifurcation occurs, note that the cubic has a
local maximum when dxd ( rx − x3 ) = r − 3x 2 = 0. Hence

                       r
          xmax          ,
                       3

and the value of the cubic at the local maximum is

                                2r r
          rxmax − ( xmax )3 =        .
                                3 3

Similarly, the value at the minimum is the negative of this quantity. Hence
saddle-node bifurcations occur when h = ohc ( r ) , where

                       2r r
          hc ( r )         .
                       2 3

Equation (1) has three fixed points for |h|  hc( r ) and one fixed point for |h|  hc ( r ).
     To summarize the results so far, we plot the bifurcation curves h = ohc( r ) in the
( r, h ) plane (Figure 3.6.2). Note that the two bifurcation curves meet tangentially
at ( r, h ) = (0,0); such a point is called a cusp point. We also label the regions that
correspond to different numbers of fixed points. Saddle-node bifurcations occur
all along the boundary of the regions, except at the cusp point, where we have
a codimension-2 bifurcation. (This fancy terminology essentially means that we
have had to tune two parameters, h and r, to achieve this type of bifurcation. Until
now, all our bifurcations could be achieved by tuning a single parameter, and were
therefore codimension-1 bifurcations.)


                       3.6   IMPERFECT BIFURCATIONS AND CATASTROPHES                        71
                  2

                              1 fixed point                           hc (r )
                  1
             h
                  0                                  3 fixed points


                 −1
                                                                    − hc (r )

                 −2                                                     r
                  −2         −1           0          1            2

             Figure 3.6.2


   Pictures like Figure 3.6.2 will prove very useful in our future work. We will refer
to such pictures as stability diagrams. They show the different types of behavior
that occur as we move around in parameter space (here, the ( r, h ) plane).
   Now let’s present our results in a more familiar way by showing the bifurca-
tion diagram of x * vs. r , for fixed h (Figure 3.6.3).

                  x                                             x




                                    r                                            r




                 (a) h = 0                                     (b) h ≠ 0

  Figure 3.6.3


When h = 0 we have the usual pitchfork diagram (Figure 3.6.3a) but when h v 0,
the pitchfork disconnects into two pieces (Figure 3.6.3b). The upper piece con-
sists entirely of stable fixed points, whereas the lower piece has both stable and
unstable branches. As we increase r from negative values, there’s no longer a sharp
transition at r = 0; the fixed point simply glides smoothly along the upper branch.
Furthermore, the lower branch of stable points is not accessible unless we make a
fairly large disturbance.
    Alternatively, we could plot x * vs. h, for fixed r (Figure 3.6.4).




72        BIFURCATIONS
                      x                                    x




                                    h                                    h




                     (a) r ≤ 0                            (b) r > 0

             Figure 3.6.4


When r b 0 there’s one stable fixed point for each h (Figure 3.6.4a). However, when
r  0 there are three fixed points when |h|  hc( r ), and one otherwise (Figure 3.6.4b).
In the triple-valued region, the middle branch is unstable and the upper and lower
branches are stable. Note that these graphs look like Figure 3.6.1 rotated by 90°.
                                           There is one last way to plot the results,
x
                                       which may appeal to you if you like to pic-
                                       ture things in three dimensions. This method
                                       of presentation contains all of the others as
                                       cross sections or projections. If we plot the
                                       fixed points x * above the ( r, h ) plane, we
                                       get the cusp catastrophe surface shown in
                           h
                                       Figure 3.6.5. The surface folds over on itself
                         r             in certain places. The projection of these
                                       folds onto the ( r, h ) plane yields the bifurca-
Figure 3.6.5
                                       tion curves shown in Figure 3.6.2. A cross
                                       section at fixed h yields Figure 3.6.3, and a
x
                                       cross section at fixed r yields Figure 3.6.4.
                                           The term catastrophe is motivated by the
                                       fact that as parameters change, the state of
                                       the system can be carried over the edge of the
                                       upper surface, after which it drops discon-
                                    h  tinuously to the lower surface (Figure 3.6.6).
                                       This jump could be truly catastrophic for the
          r
                                       equilibrium of a bridge or a building. We will
                                       see scientific examples of catastrophes in the
Figure 3.6.6                           context of insect outbreaks (Section 3.7) and
                                       in the following example from mechanics.
   For more about catastrophe theory, see Zeeman (1977) or Poston and Stewart
(1978). Incidentally, there was a violent controversy about this subject in the late
1970s. If you like watching fights, have a look at Zahler and Sussman (1977) and
Kolata (1977).

                   3.6    IMPERFECT BIFURCATIONS AND CATASTROPHES                     73
         Bead on a Tilted Wire
   As a simple example of imperfect bifurcation and catastrophe, consider the fol-
lowing mechanical system (Figure 3.6.7).

                                      x
                    θ

                                           m               wire
                             a
                                     k              g



             Figure 3.6.7


A bead of mass m is constrained to slide along a straight wire inclined at an angle
R with respect to the horizontal. The mass is attached to a spring of stiffness k and
relaxed length L 0 , and is also acted on by gravity. We choose coordinates along the
wire so that x = 0 occurs at the point closest to the support point of the spring; let
a be the distance between this support point and the wire.
    In Exercises 3.5.4 and 3.6.5, you are asked to analyze the equilibrium positions
of the bead. But first let’s get some physical intuition. When the wire is horizontal
( R = 0), there is perfect symmetry between the left and right sides of the wire, and
x = 0 is always an equilibrium position. The stability of this equilibrium depends
on the relative sizes of L 0 and a : if L 0  a, the spring is in tension and so the
equilibrium should be stable. But if L 0  a, the spring is compressed and so we
expect an unstable equilibrium at x = 0 and a pair of stable equilibria to either side
of it. Exercise 3.5.4 deals with this simple case.
    The problem becomes more interesting when we tilt the wire ( R v 0). For small
tilting, we expect that there are still three equilibria if L 0  a. However if the
tilt becomes too steep, perhaps you can see intuitively that the uphill equilibrium
might suddenly disappear, causing the bead to jump catastrophically to the down-
hill equilibrium. You might even want to build this mechanical system and try it.
Exercise 3.6.5 asks you to work through the mathematical details.


3.7     Insect Outbreak
For a biological example of bifurcation and catastrophe, we turn now to a model
for the sudden outbreak of an insect called the spruce budworm. This insect is
a serious pest in eastern Canada, where it attacks the leaves of the balsam fir tree.
When an outbreak occurs, the budworms can defoliate and kill most of the fir trees
in the forest in about four years.




74        BIFURCATIONS

