=== PDF pages 89-95 (printed 74-80) ===
         Bead on a Tilted Wire
   As a simple example of imperfect bifurcation and catastrophe, consider the fol-
lowing mechanical system (Figure 3.6.7).

                                      x
                    θ

                                           m               wire
                             a
                                     k              g



             Figure 3.6.7


A bead of mass m is constrained to slide along a straight wire inclined at an angle
R with respect to the horizontal. The mass is attached to a spring of stiffness k and
relaxed length L 0 , and is also acted on by gravity. We choose coordinates along the
wire so that x = 0 occurs at the point closest to the support point of the spring; let
a be the distance between this support point and the wire.
    In Exercises 3.5.4 and 3.6.5, you are asked to analyze the equilibrium positions
of the bead. But first let’s get some physical intuition. When the wire is horizontal
( R = 0), there is perfect symmetry between the left and right sides of the wire, and
x = 0 is always an equilibrium position. The stability of this equilibrium depends
on the relative sizes of L 0 and a : if L 0  a, the spring is in tension and so the
equilibrium should be stable. But if L 0  a, the spring is compressed and so we
expect an unstable equilibrium at x = 0 and a pair of stable equilibria to either side
of it. Exercise 3.5.4 deals with this simple case.
    The problem becomes more interesting when we tilt the wire ( R v 0). For small
tilting, we expect that there are still three equilibria if L 0  a. However if the
tilt becomes too steep, perhaps you can see intuitively that the uphill equilibrium
might suddenly disappear, causing the bead to jump catastrophically to the down-
hill equilibrium. You might even want to build this mechanical system and try it.
Exercise 3.6.5 asks you to work through the mathematical details.


3.7     Insect Outbreak
For a biological example of bifurcation and catastrophe, we turn now to a model
for the sudden outbreak of an insect called the spruce budworm. This insect is
a serious pest in eastern Canada, where it attacks the leaves of the balsam fir tree.
When an outbreak occurs, the budworms can defoliate and kill most of the fir trees
in the forest in about four years.




74        BIFURCATIONS
   Ludwig et al. (1978) proposed and analyzed an elegant model of the interaction
between budworms and the forest. They simplified the problem by exploiting a
separation of time scales: the budworm population evolves on a fast time scale
(they can increase their density fivefold in a year, so they have a characteristic
time scale of months), whereas the trees grow and die on a slow time scale (they
can completely replace their foliage in about 7–10 years, and their life span in the
absence of budworms is 100–150 years.) Thus, as far as the budworm dynamics are
concerned, the forest variables may be treated as constants. At the end of the anal-
ysis, we will allow the forest variables to drift very slowly—this drift ultimately
triggers an outbreak.

         Model
   The proposed model for the budworm population dynamics is

                  ⎛ N⎞
         N = RN ⎜⎜1− ⎟⎟⎟ − p( N ).
                  ⎜⎝ K ⎠

In the absence of predators, the budworm population N ( t ) is assumed to grow
logistically with growth rate R and carrying capacity K. The carrying capacity
depends on the amount of foliage left on the trees, and so it is a slowly drifting
                                          parameter; at this stage we treat it as fixed.
                                          The term p ( N ) represents the death rate
B                                p(N )
                                          due to predation, chiefly by birds, and
                                          is assumed to have the shape shown in
                                          Figure 3.7.1. There is almost no predation
                                  N       when budworms are scarce; the birds seek
          A                               food elsewhere. However, once the popula-
                                          tion exceeds a certain critical level N = A,
Figure 3.7.1
                                          the predation turns on sharply and then
saturates (the birds are eating as fast as they can). Ludwig et al. (1978) assumed the
specific form

                      BN 2
          p( N ) =
                     A +N2
                      2



where A, B  0. Thus the full model is

                  ⎛ N⎞      BN 2
         N = RN ⎜⎜1− ⎟⎟⎟ − 2    .                                         (1)
                  ⎜⎝ K ⎠ A + N 2

   We now have several questions to answer. What do we mean by an “outbreak”
in the context of this model? The idea must be that, as parameters drift, the bud-
worm population suddenly jumps from a low to a high level. But what do we



                                                   3.7 INSECT OUTBREAK               75
mean by “low” and “high,” and are there solutions with this character? To answer
these questions, it is convenient to recast the model into a dimensionless form,
as in Section 3.5.

         Dimensionless Formulation
    The model (1) has four parameters: R, K, A, and B. As usual, there are various
ways to nondimensionalize the system. For example, both A and K have the same
dimension as N, and so either N / A or N / K could serve as a dimensionless popu-
lation level. It often takes some trial and error to find the best choice. In this case,
our heuristic will be to scale the equation so that all the dimensionless groups are
pushed into the logistic part of the dynamics, with none in the predation part.
This turns out to ease the graphical analysis of the fixed points.
    To get rid of the parameters in the predation term, we divide (1) by B and
then let

         x = N / A,
which yields

          A dx R    ⎛ Ax ⎞⎟    x2
              = Ax ⎜⎜1−    ⎟ −       .                                     (2)
          B dt B    ⎜⎝  K ⎟⎠ 1 + x 2

Equation (2) suggests that we should introduce a dimensionless time U and dimen-
sionless groups r and k, as follows:

               Bt              RA                K
         U       ,      r       ,         k     .
               A               B                 A

Then (2) becomes

          dx       ⎛ x⎞      x2
             = rx ⎜⎜1− ⎟⎟⎟ −      ,                                        (3)
          dU       ⎜⎝ k ⎠ 1 + x 2

which is our final dimensionless form. Here r and k are the dimensionless growth
rate and carrying capacity, respectively.

         Analysis of Fixed Points
Equation (3) has a fixed point at x * = 0; it is always unstable (Exercise 3.7.1). The
intuitive explanation is that the predation is extremely weak for small x, and so the
budworm population grows exponentially for x near zero.
   The other fixed points of (3) are given by the solutions of

            ⎛ x⎞      x
         r ⎜⎜1− ⎟⎟⎟ =      .                                               (4)
            ⎜⎝ k ⎠ 1 + x 2



76         BIFURCATIONS
                                           This equation is easy to analyze graph-
                                           ically—we simply graph the right- and
r                                          left-hand sides of (4), and look for inter-
                                           sections (Figure 3.7.2). The left-hand side
                            x              of (4) represents a straight line with
                         1 +x2             x-intercept equal to k and a y-intercept
                                           equal to r, and the right-hand side rep-
        k                             x resents a curve that is independent of
                                           the parameters! Hence, as we vary the
Figure 3.7.2
                                           parameters r and k, the line moves but
                                           the curve doesn’t—this convenient prop-
erty is what motivated our choice of nondimensionalization.
Figure 3.7.2 shows that if k is sufficiently small, there is exactly one intersection
for any r  0. However, for large k, we can have one, two, or three intersections,
depending on the value of r (Figure 3.7.3). Let’s suppose that there are three inter-
                                                sections a, b, and c. As we decrease
                                                r with k fixed, the line rotates coun-
                                                terclockwise about k. Then the
r
                                                fixed points b and c approach each
                                                other and eventually coalesce in a
                                                saddle-node bifurcation when the
                                                line intersects the curve tangentially
                                                (dashed line in Figure 3.7.3). After the
                                         x
   a         b               c     k            bifurcation, the only remaining fixed
                                                point is a (in addition to x * = 0, of
Figure 3.7.3                                    course). Similarly, a and b can collide
                                                and annihilate as r is increased.
   To determine the stability of the fixed points, we recall that x * = 0 is unstable,
and also observe that the stability type must alternate as we move along the
x-axis.
                                                        Hence a is stable, b is unsta-
                                                     ble, and c is stable. Thus, for r
dx                                                   and k in the range correspond-
dτ
                                                     ing to three positive fixed points,
                                                     the vector field is qualitatively
                                                     like that shown in Figure 3.7.4.
                                               x
                                  c
                                                     The smaller stable fixed point
              a        b
                                                     a is called the refuge level of the
                                                     budworm population, while the
Figure 3.7.4
                                                     larger stable point c is the out-
break level. From the point of view of pest control, one would like to keep the
population at a and away from c. The fate of the system is determined by the initial



                                                   3.7 INSECT OUTBREAK               77
condition x 0 ; an outbreak occurs if and only if x0  b. In this sense the unstable
equilibrium b plays the role of a threshold.
   An outbreak can also be triggered by a saddle-node bifurcation. If the param-
eters r and k drift in such a way that the fixed point a disappears, then the popula-
tion will jump suddenly to the outbreak level c. The situation is made worse by
the hysteresis effect—even if the parameters are restored to their values before the
outbreak, the population will not drop back to the refuge level.

         Calculating the Bifurcation Curves
     Now we compute the curves in ( k, r ) space where the system undergoes
saddle-node bifurcations. The calculation is somewhat harder than that in
Section 3.6: we will not be able to write r explicitly as a function of k, for exam-
ple. Instead, the bifurcation curves will be written in the parametric form ( k ( x ),
r ( x )), where x runs through all positive values. (Please don’t be confused by this
traditional terminology—one would call x the “parameter” in these parametric
equations, even though r and k are themselves parameters in a different sense.)
     As discussed earlier, the condition for a saddle-node bifurcation is that the line
r (1  x / k ) intersects the curve x / (1 x 2) tangentially. Thus we require both

            ⎛ x⎞      x
         r ⎜⎜1− ⎟⎟⎟ =                                                      (5)
            ⎜⎝ k ⎠ 1 + x 2

and

          d ⎡ ⎛⎜ x ⎞⎟⎤     d ⎡ x ⎤
              ⎢ r ⎜1− ⎟⎥ =   ⎢        ⎥.                                   (6)
                  ⎜   ⎟
          dx ⎢⎣ ⎝ k ⎠⎥⎦ dx ⎢⎣1 + x 2 ⎥⎦

After differentiation, (6) reduces to

             r   1− x 2
         −     =           .                                               (7)
             k (1 + x 2 )2

We substitute this expression for r / k into (5), which allows us to express r solely in
terms of x. The result is

                 2 x3
         r=               .                                                (8)
              (1 + x 2 )2

Then inserting (8) into (7) yields

                2 x3
         k=           .                                                    (9)
               x 2 −1

The condition k  0 implies that x must be restricted to the range x  1.

78         BIFURCATIONS
   Together (8) and (9) define the bifurcation curves. For each x  1, we plot the
corresponding point (k ( x ), r ( x )) in the ( k, r ) plane. The resulting curves are shown
in Figure 3.7.5. (Exercise 3.7.2 deals with some of the analytical properties of these
curves.)

                        0.8
                        0.7                                 outbreak
                        0.6
                        0.5
                r
                        0.4
                                                            bistable
                        0.3
                        0.2
                                          refuge
                        0.1
                        0.0
                              0               10       20              30     40
                                                       k

                Figure 3.7.5


The different regions in Figure 3.7.5 are labeled according to the stable fixed points
that exist. The refuge level a is the only stable state for low r, and the outbreak level
c is the only stable state for large r. In the bistable region, both stable states exist.
    The stability diagram is very similar to Figure 3.6.2. It too can be regarded
as the projection of a cusp catastrophe surface, as schematically illustrated in
Figure 3.7.6. You are hereby challenged to graph the surface accurately!

                    x
                                                                   outbreak
                                      r


                                  k                refuge




                    Figure 3.7.6



         Comparison with Observations
   Now we need to decide on biologically plausible values of the dimensionless
groups r = RA / B and k = K / A. A complication is that these parameters may drift



                                                              3.7 INSECT OUTBREAK        79
slowly as the condition of the forest changes. According to Ludwig et al. (1978), r
increases as the forest grows, while k remains fixed.
   They reason as follows: let S denote the average size of the trees, interpreted as the
total surface area of the branches in a stand. Then the carrying capacity K should
be proportional to the available foliage, so K = K ′S . Similarly, the half-saturation
parameter A in the predation term should be proportional to S; predators such as
birds search units of foliage, not acres of forest, and so the relevant quantity Aa must
have the dimensions of budworms per unit of branch area. Hence A = AaS and
therefore

               RA′                   K′
          r=       S,         k=        .                                      (10)
                B                    A′

   The experimental observations suggest that for a young forest, typically k x 300
and r  1 / 2 so the parameters lie in the bistable region. The budworm population is
kept down by the birds, which find it easy to search the small number of branches per
acre. However, as the forest grows, S increases and therefore the point ( k, r ) drifts
upward in parameter space toward the outbreak region of Figure 3.7.5. Ludwig et al.
(1978) estimate that r x 1 for a fully mature forest, which lies dangerously in the
outbreak region. After an outbreak occurs, the fir trees die and the forest is taken
over by birch trees. But they are less efficient at using nutrients and eventually the fir
trees come back—this recovery takes about 50–100 years (Murray 2002).
   We conclude by mentioning some of the approximations in the model presented
here. The tree dynamics have been neglected; see Ludwig et al. (1978) for a discussion
of this longer time-scale behavior. We’ve also neglected the spatial distribution of
budworms and their possible dispersal—see Ludwig et al. (1979) and Murray (2002)
for treatments of this aspect of the problem.


 EXERCISES FOR CHAPTER 3


3.1 Saddle-Node Bifurcation
For each of the following exercises, sketch all the qualitatively different vector
fields that occur as r is varied. Show that a saddle-node bifurcation occurs at a
critical value of r, to be determined. Finally, sketch the bifurcation diagram of
fixed points x* versus r.
3.1.1     x = 1 + rx + x 2                     3.1.2     x = r − cosh x
3.1.3     x = r + x − ln (1 + x )              3.1.4     x = r + 12 x − x / (1 + x )
3.1.5    (Unusual bifurcations) In discussing the normal form of the saddle-node
bifurcation, we mentioned the assumption that a = ∂f / ∂r |(x*,rc ) = 0 . To see what




80         BIFURCATIONS

