=== PDF pages 110-120 (printed 95-105) ===
          4
           FLOWS ON THE CIRCLE




4.0     Introduction
So far we’ve concentrated on the equation x  f ( x ), which we visualized as a
vector field on the line. Now it’s time to consider a new kind of differential equa-
tion and its corresponding phase space. This equation,

          R  f (R ),

corresponds to a vector field on the circle. Here R is a point on the circle and R is the
velocity vector at that point, determined by the rule R  f (R ). Like the line, the
circle is one-dimensional, but it has an important new property: by flowing in one
direction, a particle can eventually return to its starting place (Figure 4.0.1). Thus
periodic solutions become possible for the first time in this book! To put it another
                 way, vector fields on the circle provide the most basic model of sys-
                 tems that can oscillate.
                     However, in all other respects, flows on the circle are similar to
                 flows on the line, so this will be a short chapter. We will discuss
                 the dynamics of some simple oscillators, and then show that these
                 equations arise in a wide variety of applications. For example, the
                 flashing of fireflies and the voltage oscillations of superconduct-
Figure 4.0.1
                 ing Josephson junctions have been modeled by the same equation,
even though their oscillation frequencies differ by about ten orders of magnitude!


4.1 Examples and Definitions
Let’s begin with some examples, and then give a more careful definition of vector
fields on the circle.



                                        4.1   EXAMPLES AND DEFINITIONS                 95
EXAMPLE 4.1.1:

Sketch the vector field on the circle corresponding to R  sin R.
    Solution: We assign coordinates to the circle in the usual way, with R  0 in the
direction of “east,” and with R increasing counterclockwise.
    To sketch the vector field, we first find the fixed points, defined by R  0. These
occur at R*  0 and R*  Q. To determine their stability, note that sin R  0 on the
upper semicircle. Hence R  0, so the flow is counterclockwise. Similarly, the flow
is clockwise on the lower semicircle, where R  0. Hence R*  Q is stable and
R*  0 is unstable, as shown in Figure 4.1.1.
                                         Actually, we’ve seen this example before—it’s
                                     given in Section 2.1. There we regarded x  sin x
θ* = π                    θ * = 0 as a vector field on the line. Compare Figure 2.1.1
                                     with Figure 4.1.1 and notice how much clearer it
                                     is to think of this system as a vector field on the
                                     circle. ■
Figure 4.1.1




EXAMPLE 4.1.2:

Explain why R  R cannot be regarded as a vector field on the circle, for R in the
range d  R  d.
   Solution: The velocity is not uniquely defined. For example, R  0 and R  2Q
are two labels for the same point on the circle, but the first label implies a velocity
of 0 at that point, while the second implies a velocity of 2Q. ■

   If we try to avoid this non-uniqueness by restricting R to the range Q  Rb Q,
then the velocity vector jumps discontinuously at the point corresponding to R  Q.
Try as we might, there’s no way to consider R  R as a smooth vector field on the
entire circle.
   Of course, there’s no problem regarding R  R as a vector field on the line,
because then R  0 and R  2Q are different points, and so there’s no conflict about
how to define the velocity at each of them.
   Example 4.1.2 suggests how to define vector fields on the circle. Here’s a geo-
metric definition: A vector field on the circle is a rule that assigns a unique velocity
vector to each point on the circle.
   In practice, such vector fields arise when we have a first-order system R  f (R ) ,
where f ( R) is a real-valued, 2Q-periodic function. That is, f ( R 2Q)  f ( R) for all
real R. Moreover, we assume (as usual) that f ( R) is smooth enough to guarantee
existence and uniqueness of solutions. Although this system could be regarded as
a special case of a vector field on the line, it is usually clearer to think of it as a
vector field on the circle (as in Example 4.1.1). This means that we don’t distinguish


96         FLOWS ON THE CIRCLE
between R’s that differ by an integer multiple of 2Q. Here’s where the periodicity of
f ( R ) becomes important—it ensures that the velocity R is uniquely defined at each
point R on the circle, in the sense that R is the same, whether we call that point R or
R 2Q, or R 2Qk for any integer k.


4.2 Uniform Oscillator
A point on a circle is often called an angle or a phase. Then the simplest oscillator
of all is one in which the phase R changes uniformly:

         θ  ω
where X is a constant. The solution is

         R( t )  Xt   R0 ,
which corresponds to uniform motion around the circle at an angular frequency X.
This solution is periodic, in the sense that R( t ) changes by 2Q, and therefore returns
to the same point on the circle, after a time T  2Q / X. We call T the period of the
oscillation.
   Notice that we have said nothing about the amplitude of the oscillation. There
really is no amplitude variable in our system. If we had an amplitude as well as a
phase variable, we’d be in a two-dimensional phase space; this situation is more com-
plicated and will be discussed later in the book. (Or if you prefer, you can imagine
that the oscillation occurs at some fixed amplitude, corresponding to the radius of
our circular phase space. In any case, amplitude plays no role in the dynamics.)


EXAMPLE 4.2.1:

Two joggers, Speedy and Pokey, are running at a steady pace around a circular
track. It takes Speedy T1 seconds to run once around the track, whereas it takes
Pokey T2  T1 seconds. Of course, Speedy will periodically overtake Pokey; how
long does it take for Speedy to lap Pokey once, assuming that they start together?
   Solution: Let R1( t ) be Speedy’s position on the track. Then θ1  ω1 where
X1  2Q / T1. This equation says that Speedy runs at a steady pace and completes
               θ1        a circuit every T1 seconds. Similarly, suppose that
                         θ2  ω2  2π T2 for Pokey.
             φ     θ2        The condition for Speedy to lap Pokey is that the angle
                         between them has increased by 2Q. Thus if we define the
                         phase difference G  R1  R2, we want to find how long it
                         takes for G to increase by 2Q (Figure 4.2.1). By subtraction
                         we find φ = θ1 − θ2 = ω1 − ω2 . Thus G increases by 2Q after
Figure 4.2.1
                         a time


                                              4.2 UNIFORM OSCILLATOR                  97
                                         −1
                       2π       ⎛1 1⎞
            Tlap =          = ⎜⎜⎜ − ⎟⎟⎟ . ■
                     ω1 − ω2 ⎜⎝T1 T2 ⎟⎠

   Example 4.2.1 illustrates an effect called the beat phenomenon. Two noninter-
acting oscillators with different frequencies will periodically go in and out of phase
with each other. You may have heard this effect on a Sunday morning: sometimes
the bells of two different churches will ring simultaneously, then slowly drift apart,
and then eventually ring together again. If the oscillators interact (for example, if
the two joggers try to stay together or the bell ringers can hear each other), then we
can get more interesting effects, as we will see in Section 4.5 on the flashing rhythm
of fireflies.


4.3     Nonuniform Oscillator
The equation

            θ = ω − a sin θ                                                (1)
arises in many different branches of science and engineering. Here is a partial list:
            Electronics (phase-locked loops)
            Biology (oscillating neurons, firefly flashing rhythm, human sleep-wake
               cycle)
            Condensed-matter physics (Josephson junction, charge-density waves)
            Mechanics (Overdamped pendulum driven by a constant torque)
Some of these applications will be discussed later in this chapter and in the
exercises.
                             To analyze (1), we assume that X  0 and a p 0 for
            .            convenience; the results for negative X and a are sim-
           θ
                         ilar. A typical graph of f ( R )  X  a sin R is shown
        ω                in Figure 4.3.1. Note that X is the mean and a is the
                     a
                         amplitude.
                               θ
     −π 2            π 2           Vector Fields
                                 If a  0, (1) reduces to the uniform oscillator. The
                              parameter a introduces a nonuniformity in the flow
                              around the circle: the flow is fastest at R  –Q / 2 and
Figure 4.3.1                  slowest at R  Q / 2 (Figure 4.3.2a). This nonuniformity
                              becomes more pronounced as a increases. When a is
slightly less than X, the oscillation is very jerky: the phase point R( t ) takes a long
time to pass through a bottleneck near R  Q / 2, after which it zips around the rest
of the circle on a much faster time scale. When a  X, the system stops oscillating



98           FLOWS ON THE CIRCLE
altogether: a half-stable fixed point has been born in a saddle-node bifurcation at
R  Q / 2 (Figure 4.3.2b). Finally, when a X, the half-stable fixed point splits into a
stable and unstable fixed point (Figure 4.3.2c). All trajectories are attracted to the
stable fixed point as t l d.

                  .
                 θ




                      π 2   θ
slow passage
through here
(bottleneck)

        (a) a < ω                      (b) a = ω                     (c) a > ω

Figure 4.3.2


The same information can be shown by plotting the vector fields on the circle
(Figure 4.3.3).

                                         θ =π 2
        slow




        fast
     (a) a < ω                         (b) a = ω                         (c) a > ω

 Figure 4.3.3




EXAMPLE 4.3.1:

Use linear stability analysis to classify the fixed points of (1) for a  X.
  Solution: The fixed points R * satisfy

          sin θ*  ω a ,               cos θ* = ± 1− ( ω a )2 .
Their linear stability is determined by

           f ′(θ*) = −a cos θ* = B a 1− ( ω a )2 .


                                         4.3   NONUNIFORM OSCILLATOR                 99
Thus the fixed point with cos R*  0 is the stable one, since f ′(θ*)  0. This agrees
with Figure 4.3.2c. ■

         Oscillation Period
   For a  X, the period of the oscillation can be found analytically, as follows: the
time required for R to change by 2Q is given by

                                   2π   dt
         T = ∫ dt = ∫                      dθ
                               0        dθ
                     2π      dθ
            =∫
                 0        ω − a sin θ

where we have used (1) to replace dt / dR. This integral can be evaluated by complex
variable methods, or by the substitution u  tan R2 . (See Exercise 4.3.2 for details.)
The result is

                      2π
         T=                         .                                     (2)
                 ω 2 − a2

Figure 4.3.4 shows the graph of T as a function of a.

                                        T




                              2π ω
                                                     ω       a

                              Figure 4.3.4


When a  0, Equation (2) reduces to T  2Q / X, the familiar result for a uniform
oscillator. The period increases with a and diverges as a approaches X from below
(we denote this limit by a l X – ).
   We can estimate the order of the divergence by noting that

             X 2 − a2 = X + a X − a
                            ≈ 2X X − a

as a l X –. Hence

               ⎛ π 2 ⎞⎟ 1
         T ≈ ⎜⎜⎜      ⎟⎟     ,                                            (3)
               ⎜⎝ ω ⎟⎠ ω − a



100       FLOWS ON THE CIRCLE
which shows that T blows up like ( ac  a )–1 / 2, where ac  X. Now let’s explain the
origin of this square-root scaling law.

         Ghosts and Bottlenecks
   The square-root scaling law found above is a very general feature of systems that
are close to a saddle-node bifurcation. Just after the fixed points collide, there is a
saddle-node remnant or ghost that leads to slow passage through a bottleneck.
   For example, consider θ = ω − a sin θ for decreasing values of a, starting with
a  X. As a decreases, the two fixed points approach each other, collide, and dis-
appear (this sequence was shown earlier in Figure 4.3.3, except now you have to
read from right to left.) For a slightly less than X, the fixed points near Q / 2 no lon-
ger exist, but they still make themselves felt through a saddle-node ghost
(Figure 4.3.5).

                                            .
                                           θ



                                                                 θ



                                                       bottleneck
                                                       due to ghost


                                 Figure 4.3.5


   A graph of R(t ) would have the shape shown in Figure 4.3.6. Notice how the
trajectory spends practically all its time getting through the bottleneck.

                  θ                      Tbottleneck




                                                                      t

                  Figure 4.3.6


   Now we want to derive a general scaling law for the time required to pass
through a bottleneck. The only thing that matters is the behavior of R in the
immediate vicinity of the minimum, since the time spent there dominates all other
time scales in the problem. Generically, R looks parabolic near its minimum. Then
the problem simplifies tremendously: the dynamics can be reduced to the normal




                                           4.3    NONUNIFORM OSCILLATOR             101
form for a saddle-node bifurcation! By a local rescaling of space, we can rewrite
the vector field as

          x = r + x 2
where r is proportional to the distance from the bifurcation, and 0  r  1. The
graph of x is shown in Figure 4.3.7.

                                .
                                x




                                                           x
                                               0

                                Figure 4.3.7


To estimate the time spent in the bottleneck, we calculate the time taken for x to
go from d (all the way on one side of the bottleneck) to d (all the way on the
other side). The result is

                            ∞ dx      Q
          Tbottleneck ≈ ∫           =    ,                                    (4)
                         −∞ r + x 2
                                       r

which shows the generality of the square-root scaling law. (Exercise 4.3.1 reminds
you how to evaluate the integral in (4).)


EXAMPLE 4.3.2:

Estimate the period of θ = ω − a sin θ in the limit a l X – , using the normal form
method instead of the exact result.
   Solution: The period will be essentially the time required to get through the
bottleneck. To estimate this time, we use a Taylor expansion about R  Q / 2, where
the bottleneck occurs. Let G  R – Q/2, where G is small. Then

          φ = ω − a sin(φ + π2 )
            = ω − a cos φ
            = ω − a + 12 aφ 2 + 

which is close to the desired normal form. If we let

          x = ( a 2 )1 2 φ,         r = ω −a
then ( 2 a )1 2 x ≈ r + x 2 , to leading order in x. Separating variables yields


102        FLOWS ON THE CIRCLE
                            ∞     dx                Q
         T ≈ ( 2 a )1 2 ∫              = ( 2 a )1 2    .
                        −∞      r + x2               r

Now we substitute r  X a . Furthermore, since a l X – , we may replace 2 / a by
2 / X. Hence

               ⎛ π 2 ⎞⎟ 1
         T ≈ ⎜⎜⎜      ⎟⎟     ,
               ⎜⎝ ω ⎟⎠ ω − a

which agrees with (3). ■


4.4 Overdamped Pendulum
We now consider a simple mechanical example of a nonuniform oscillator: an over-
damped pendulum driven by a constant torque. Let R denote the angle between the
pendulum and the downward vertical, and suppose that R increases counterclock-
wise (Figure 4.4.1).

                                        Γ



                                                           g
                                            L
                                       θ
                                                  m


                                   Figure 4.4.1


Then Newton’s law yields

         mL2 R + bR + mgL sin R = Γ                                     (1)
where m is the mass and L is the length of the pendulum, b is a viscous damping
constant, g is the acceleration due to gravity, and ( is a constant applied torque.
All of these parameters are positive. In particular, (  0 implies that the applied
torque drives the pendulum counterclockwise, as shown in Figure 4.4.1.
   Equation (1) is a second-order system, but in the overdamped limit of extremely
large b, it may be approximated by a first-order system (see Section 3.5 and
Exercise 4.4.1). In this limit the inertia term mL2 R is negligible and so (1) becomes

         bR + mgL sin R = Γ .                                             (2)




                                                4.4   OVERDAMPED PENDULUM          103
To think about this problem physically, you should imagine that the pendulum
is immersed in molasses. The torque ( enables the pendulum to plow through its
viscous surroundings. Please realize that this is the opposite limit from the familiar
frictionless case in which energy is conserved, and the pendulum swings back and
forth forever. In the present case, energy is lost to damping and pumped in by the
applied torque.
    To analyze (2), we first nondimensionalize it. Dividing by mgL yields

           b     Γ
              R=     − sin R.
          mgL    mgL

Hence, if we let

              mgL                    Γ
         τ=       t,           γ=                                        (3)
               b                    mgL

then

         θ ′ = γ − sin θ                                                 (4)
where θ ′ = d θ d τ .

    The dimensionless group H is the ratio of the applied torque to the maximum
gravitational torque. If H  1 then the applied torque can never be balanced by the
gravitational torque and the pendulum will overturn continually. The rotation rate
is nonuniform, since gravity helps the applied torque on one side and opposes it on
the other (Figure 4.4.2).

                                           γ




                            fast                    slow
                                           θ




                            Figure 4.4.2


   As H l 1+, the pendulum takes longer and longer to climb past R  Q / 2 on the
slow side. When H  1 a fixed point appears at R *  Q / 2, and then splits into two
when H  1 (Figure 4.4.3). On physical grounds, it’s clear that the lower of the two
equilibrium positions is the stable one.




104        FLOWS ON THE CIRCLE
                                            γ




                                  Figure 4.4.3


As H decreases, the two fixed points move farther apart. Finally, when H  0, the
applied torque vanishes and there is an unstable equilibrium at the top (inverted
pendulum) and a stable equilibrium at the bottom.


4.5     Fireflies
Fireflies provide one of the most spectacular examples of synchronization in
nature. In some parts of southeast Asia, thousands of male fireflies gather in trees
at night and flash on and off in unison. Meanwhile the female fireflies cruise over-
head, looking for males with a handsome light.
    To really appreciate this amazing display, you have to see a movie or videotape
of it. A good example is shown in David Attenborough’s (1992) television series
The Trials of Life, in the episode called “Talking to Strangers.” See Buck and Buck
(1976) for a beautifully written introduction to synchronous fireflies, and Buck
(1988) for a comprehensive review. For mathematical models of synchronous fire-
flies, see Mirollo and Strogatz (1990) and Ermentrout (1991).
    How does the synchrony occur? Certainly the fireflies don’t start out synchro-
nized; they arrive in the trees at dusk, and the synchrony builds up gradually as
the night goes on. The key is that the fireflies influence each other: When one firefly
sees the flash of another, it slows down or speeds up so as to flash more nearly in
phase on the next cycle.
    Hanson (1978) studied this effect experimentally, by periodically flashing a light
at a firefly and watching it try to synchronize. For a range of periods close to the
firefly’s natural period (about 0.9 sec), the firefly was able to match its frequency to
the periodic stimulus. In this case, one says that the firefly had been entrained by
the stimulus. However, if the stimulus was too fast or too slow, the firefly could not
keep up and entrainment was lost—then a kind of beat phenomenon occurred.
But in contrast to the simple beat phenomenon of Section 4.2, the phase differ-
ence between stimulus and firefly did not increase uniformly. The phase difference
increased slowly during part of the beat cycle, as the firefly struggled in vain to
synchronize, and then it increased rapidly through 2Q, after which the firefly tried
again on the next beat cycle. This process is called phase walkthrough or phase drift.


                                                             4.5 FIREFLIES         105

