=== PDF pages 140-154 (printed 125-139) ===
         5
          LINEAR SYSTEMS




5.0 Introduction
As we’ve seen, in one-dimensional phase spaces the flow is extremely confined—
all trajectories are forced to move monotonically or remain constant. In higher-
dimensional phase spaces, trajectories have much more room to maneuver, and
so a wider range of dynamical behavior becomes possible. Rather than attack all
this complexity at once, we begin with the simplest class of higher-dimensional
systems, namely linear systems in two dimensions. These systems are interesting
in their own right, and, as we’ll see later, they also play an important role in the
classification of fixed points of nonlinear systems. We begin with some definitions
and examples.


5.1 Definitions and Examples
A two-dimensional linear system is a system of the form

         x = ax + by
         y = cx + dy

where a, b, c, d are parameters. If we use boldface to denote vectors, this system
can be written more compactly in matrix form as

         x  Ax,
where

              ⎛a b ⎞⎟            ⎛ x⎞
         A = ⎜⎜       ⎟ and x = ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟⎟.
              ⎜⎝c d ⎟⎟⎠          ⎜⎝ y⎟⎠


                                          5.1   DEFINITIONS AND EXAMPLES        125
Such a system is linear in the sense that if x1 and x2 are solutions, then so is any
linear combination c1x1 c2x2. Notice that x = 0 when x = 0 , so x* = 0 is always
a fixed point for any choice of A.
    The solutions of x = Ax can be visualized as trajectories moving on the ( x, y )
plane, in this context called the phase plane. Our first example presents the phase
plane analysis of a familiar system.


EXAMPLE 5.1.1:

As discussed in elementary physics courses, the vibrations of a mass hanging from
a linear spring are governed by the linear differential equation

          mx + kx = 0                                                         (1)
where m is the mass, k is the spring constant, and x is the displacement of the mass
from equilibrium (Figure 5.1.1). Give a phase plane analysis of this simple harmonic
oscillator.
                      Solution: As you probably recall, it’s easy to solve (1) ana-
                  lytically in terms of sines and cosines. But that’s precisely what
                  makes linear equations so special! For the nonlinear equations
              k of ultimate interest to us, it’s usually impossible to find an ana-
                  lytical solution. We want to develop methods for deducing the
                  behavior of equations like (1) without actually solving them.
             m        The motion in the phase plane is determined by a vector field
  x               that comes from the differential equation (1). To find this vector
                  field, we note that the state of the system is characterized by its
                  current position x and velocity v; if we know the values of both
Figure 5.1.1      x and v, then (1) uniquely determines the future states of the
                  system. Therefore we rewrite (1) in terms of x and v, as follows:

          x  v                                                                (2a)
          v = − x.k
                   m
                                                                                (2b)

Equation (2a) is just the definition of velocity, and (2b) is the differential equation
(1) rewritten in terms of v. To simplify the notation, let X 2  k / m. Then (2) becomes

          x  v                                                                (3a)
          v = −X x.   2
                                                                                (3b)

The system (3) assigns a vector ( x , v) = (v, −X 2 x ) at each point (x, v ), and therefore
represents a vector field on the phase plane.




126        LINEAR SYSTEMS
      For example, let’s see what the vector field looks like when we’re on the x-axis.
Then v  0 and so (x , v) = ( 0, −X 2 x ). Hence the vectors point vertically down-
ward for positive x and vertically upward for negative x (Figure 5.1.2). As x gets
larger in magnitude, the vectors (0, X2 x ) get longer. Similarly, on the v-axis,
the vector field is (x , v) = (v, 0), which points to the right when v  0 and to the left
when v  0. As we move around in phase space, the vectors change direction as
shown in Figure 5.1.2.
                                                         Just as in Chapter 2, it is helpful to
                           v
                                                     visualize the vector field in terms of the
                                                     motion of an imaginary fluid. In the
                                                     present case, we imagine that a fluid is
                                                     flowing steadily on the phase plane
                                                     with a local velocity given by
                                                x ( x , v) = (v, −X 2 x ). Then, to find the tra-
                                                     jectory starting at ( x0, v0 ), we place an
                                                     imaginary particle or phase point at
                                                     ( x0, v0 ) and watch how it is carried
                                                     around by the flow.
Figure 5.1.2                                             The flow in Figure 5.1.2 swirls about
                                                     the origin. The origin is special, like the
eye of a hurricane: a phase point placed there would remain motionless, because
 ( x , v)  ( 0, 0 ) when ( x, v )  (0, 0); hence the origin is a fixed point. But a phase
point starting anywhere else would circulate around the origin and eventually
return to its starting point. Such trajectories form closed orbits, as shown in
Figure 5.1.3. Figure 5.1.3 is called the phase portrait of the system—it shows the
overall picture of trajectories in phase space.
                                                        What do fixed points and closed
                           v                        orbits have to do with the original prob-
                                                    lem of a mass on a spring? The answers
                                                    are beautifully simple. The fixed point
                                                    ( x, v )  (0, 0) corresponds to static equi-
                                                    librium of the system: the mass is at rest at
                                                x its equilibrium position and will remain
                                                    there forever, since the spring is relaxed.
                                                    The closed orbits have a more interest-
                                                    ing interpretation: they correspond to
                                                    periodic motions, i.e., oscillations of the
Figure 5.1.3                                        mass. To see this, just look at some points
                                                    on a closed orbit (Figure 5.1.4). When the
displacement x is most negative, the velocity v is zero; this corresponds to one
extreme of the oscillation, where the spring is most compressed (Figure 5.1.4).




                                            5.1   DEFINITIONS AND EXAMPLES                    127
                 x=0



                                 (a)    (b)               (c)       (d)


                                                      v

                                                    (b)
                                              (a)         (c)
                                                                x
                                                    (d)




                 Figure 5.1.4


In the next instant as the phase point flows along the orbit, it is carried to points
where x has increased and v is now positive; the mass is being pushed back toward
its equilibrium position. But by the time the mass has reached x  0, it has a large
positive velocity (Figure 5.1.4b) and so it overshoots x  0. The mass eventually
comes to rest at the other end of its swing, where x is most positive and v is zero
again (Figure 5.1.4c). Then the mass gets pulled up again and eventually completes
the cycle (Figure 5.1.4d).
    The shape of the closed orbits also has an interesting physical interpretation.
The orbits in Figures 5.1.3 and 5.1.4 are actually ellipses given by the equation
X2x 2 v 2  C, where C p 0 is a constant. In Exercise 5.1.1, you are asked to derive
this geometric result, and to show that it is equivalent to conservation of energy. ■


EXAMPLE 5.1.2:
                                            ⎛a 0 ⎞⎟
Solve the linear system x  Ax, where A = ⎜⎜       ⎟. Graph the phase portrait as
                                            ⎜⎝0 −1⎟⎟⎠

a varies from d to d, showing the qualitatively different cases.
   Solution: The system is

         ⎛x ⎞⎟ ⎛a 0 ⎞⎟⎛x⎞⎟
         ⎜⎜ ⎟ = ⎜⎜          ⎟⎜ ⎟ .
          ⎜⎝ y ⎟⎟⎠ ⎜⎝0 −1⎟⎟⎠⎜⎜⎝ y⎟⎟⎠

Matrix multiplication yields




128       LINEAR SYSTEMS
         x  ax
         y = −y

which shows that the two equations are uncoupled; there’s no x in the y-equation
and vice versa. In this simple case, each equation may be solved separately. The
solution is

         x ( t )  x0 e a t                                                (1a)
                        t
         y ( t )  y0 e .                                                  (1b)

The phase portraits for different values of a are shown in Figure 5.1.5. In each case,
y ( t ) decays exponentially. When a  0, x ( t ) also decays exponentially and so all
trajectories approach the origin as t l d. However, the direction of approach
depends on the size of a compared to 1.




              (a) a < −1              (b) a = −1             (c) =1 <a<0




              (d) a=0                 (e) a>0

       Figure 5.1.5


   In Figure 5.1.5a, we have a  1, which implies that x( t ) decays more rapidly
than y ( t ). The trajectories approach the origin tangent to the slower direction
(here, the y-direction). The intuitive explanation is that when a is very negative, the
trajectory slams horizontally onto the y-axis, because the decay of x ( t ) is almost
instantaneous. Then the trajectory dawdles along the y-axis toward the origin, and
so the approach is tangent to the y-axis. On the other hand, if we look backwards



                                      5.1   DEFINITIONS AND EXAMPLES              129
along a trajectory ( t l d), then the trajectories all become parallel to the faster
decaying direction (here, the x-direction). These conclusions are easily proved by
looking at the slope dy / dx  y / x along the trajectories; see Exercise 5.1.2. In
Figure 5.1.5a, the fixed point x*  0 is called a stable node.
    Figure 5.1.5b shows the case a  1. Equation (1) shows that y ( t ) / x ( t )  y0 / x0 
constant, and so all trajectories are straight lines through the origin. This is a very
special case—it occurs because the decay rates in the two directions are precisely
equal. In this case, x* is called a symmetrical node or star.
    When 1  a  0, we again have a node, but now the trajectories approach x*
along the x-direction, which is the more slowly decaying direction for this range of
a (Figure 5.1.5c).
    Something dramatic happens when a  0 (Figure 5.1.5d). Now (1a) becomes
x ( t ) w x0 and so there’s an entire line of fixed points along the x-axis. All trajecto-
ries approach these fixed points along vertical lines.
    Finally when B  0 (Figure 5.1.5e), x* becomes unstable, due to the exponential
growth in the x-direction. Most trajectories veer away from x* and head out to
infinity. An exception occurs if the trajectory starts on the y-axis; then it walks
a tightrope to the origin. In forward time, the trajectories are asymptotic to the
x-axis; in backward time, to the y-axis. Here x*  0 is called a saddle point. The
y-axis is called the stable manifold of the saddle point x*, defined as the set of initial
conditions x0 such that x( t ) l x* as t l d. Likewise, the unstable manifold of x*
is the set of initial conditions such that x( t ) l x* as t l d. Here the unstable
manifold is the x-axis. Note that a typical trajectory asymptotically approaches
the unstable manifold as t ld, and approaches the stable manifold as t l d.
This sounds backwards, but it’s right! ■

          Stability Language
   It’s useful to introduce some language that allows us to discuss the stability of
different types of fixed points. This language will be especially useful when we
analyze fixed points of nonlinear systems. For now we’ll be informal; precise defi-
nitions of the different types of stability will be given in Exercise 5.1.10.
   We say that x*  0 is an attracting fixed point in Figures 5.1.5a–c; all trajectories
that start near x* approach it as t l d. That is, x( t ) l x* as t l d. In fact x*
attracts all trajectories in the phase plane, so it could be called globally attracting.
   There’s a completely different notion of stability which relates to the behav-
ior of trajectories for all time, not just as t l d. We say that a fixed point x* is
Liapunov stable if all trajectories that start sufficiently close to x* remain close to it
for all time. In Figures 5.1.5a–d, the origin is Liapunov stable.
   Figure 5.1.5d shows that a fixed point can be Liapunov stable but not attracting.
This situation comes up often enough that there is a special name for it. When a
fixed point is Liapunov stable but not attracting, it is called neutrally stable. Nearby
trajectories are neither attracted to nor repelled from a neutrally stable point. As a
second example, the equilibrium point of the simple harmonic oscillator


130        LINEAR SYSTEMS
(Figure 5.1.3) is neutrally stable. Neutral stability is commonly encountered in
mechanical systems in the absence of friction. Conversely, it’s possible for a fixed
point to be attracting but not Liapunov stable; thus, neither notion of stability
implies the other. An example is given by the following vector field on the circle:
 R = 1− cos R (Figure 5.1.6). Here R*  0 attracts all trajectories as t l d, but it is
                        not Liapunov stable; there are trajectories that start infini-
                        tesimally close to R* but go on a very large excursion before
                        returning to R*.
                           However, in practice the two types of stability often
                        occur together. If a fixed point is both Liapunov stable and
                        attracting, we’ll call it stable, or sometimes asymptotically
                        stable.
                           Finally, x* is unstable in Figure 5.1.5e, because it is nei-
Figure 5.1.6
                        ther attracting nor Liapunov stable.
    A graphical convention: we’ll use open dots to denote unstable fixed points, and
solid black dots to denote Liapunov stable fixed points. This convention is consis-
tent with that used in previous chapters.


5.2 Classification of Linear Systems
The examples in the last section had the special feature that two of the entries in
the matrix A were zero. Now we want to study the general case of an arbitrary
2 q 2 matrix, with the aim of classifying all the possible phase portraits that can
occur.
   Example 5.1.2 provides a clue about how to proceed. Recall that the x and y
axes played a crucial geometric role. They determined the direction of the trajecto-
ries as t l od. They also contained special straight-line trajectories: a trajectory
starting on one of the coordinate axes stayed on that axis forever, and exhibited
simple exponential growth or decay along it.
   For the general case, we would like to find the analog of these straight-line tra-
jectories. That is, we seek trajectories of the form

         x( t )  e Mt v ,                                                 (2)
where v v 0 is some fixed vector to be determined, and M is a growth rate, also to be
determined. If such solutions exist, they correspond to exponential motion along
the line spanned by the vector v.
   To find the conditions on v and M, we substitute x( t )  eMtv into x = Ax , and
obtain MeMt v  eMtA v. Canceling the nonzero scalar factor eMt yields

         A v  Mv ,                                                        (3)




                              5.2 CLASSIFICATION OF LINEAR SYSTEMS                 131
which says that the desired straight line solutions exist if v is an eigenvector of A with
corresponding eigenvalue M. In this case we call the solution (2) an eigensolution.
   Let’s recall how to find eigenvalues and eigenvectors. (If your memory needs
more refreshing, see any text on linear algebra.) In general, the eigenvalues of a
matrix A are given by the characteristic equation det( A  MI )  0, where I is the
identity matrix. For a 2 q 2 matrix

               ⎛a b ⎞⎟
          A = ⎜⎜       ⎟,
               ⎜⎝c d ⎟⎟⎠

the characteristic equation becomes

               ⎛a − M   b ⎞⎟
          det ⎜⎜              ⎟ = 0.
               ⎜⎝ c   d − M ⎟⎟⎠

Expanding the determinant yields

         M2  UM       %0                                                     (4)
where

         U  trace( A )  a d,
         %  det( A )  ad  bc.

Then

                  τ + τ 2 − 4Δ        τ − τ 2 − 4Δ
          λ 1=                 , λ 2=                                          (5)
                       2                   2

are the solutions of the quadratic equation (4). In other words, the eigenvalues
depend only on the trace and determinant of the matrix A.
   The typical situation is for the eigenvalues to be distinct: M1 v M2. In this case, a
theorem of linear algebra states that the corresponding eigenvectors v1 and v2 are
                 x 0 = c1v 1 +c2v 2 linearly independent, and hence span the entire
                                    plane (Figure 5.2.1). In particular, any initial
                                    condition x0 can be written as a linear combi-
    c2 v 2                          nation of eigenvectors, say x0  c1v1 c2v2. This
                                    observation allows us to write down the general
                                    solution for x( t )—it is simply

                                       x(t ) = c1eM 1t v1 + c2 eM 2t v 2 .     (6)
               c1v 1
                                       Why is this the general solution? First of all, it is
                                       a linear combination of solutions to x  Ax,
Figure 5.2.1



132        LINEAR SYSTEMS
and hence is itself a solution. Second, it satisfies the initial condition x(0)  x0, and
so by the existence and uniqueness theorem, it is the only solution. (See Section 6.2
for a general statement of the existence and uniqueness theorem.)


EXAMPLE 5.2.1:

Solve the initial value problem x = x + y, y = 4 x − 2 y, subject to the initial con-
dition ( x0 , y0 )  (2, 3).
   Solution: The corresponding matrix equation is

          ⎛x ⎞⎟ ⎛1 1 ⎞⎟⎛x⎞⎟
          ⎜⎜ ⎟ = ⎜⎜          ⎟⎜ ⎟ .
           ⎜⎝ y ⎟⎟⎠ ⎜⎝4 −2⎟⎟⎠⎜⎜⎝ y⎟⎟⎠

First we find the eigenvalues of the matrix A. The matrix has U  1 and %  6,
so the characteristic equation is M2 M  6  0. Hence

          M1  2, M2  3.
   Next we find the eigenvectors. Given an eigenvalue M, the corresponding eigen-
vector v  ( v1 , v2 ) satisfies

          ⎛1− M
          ⎜⎜      1 ⎞⎟⎛⎜ v1 ⎞⎟ ⎛⎜0⎞⎟
                         ⎟⎜ ⎟ = ⎜ ⎟ .
           ⎜⎝ 4 −2 − M ⎟⎟⎠⎜⎝v2 ⎟⎟⎠ ⎜⎝0⎟⎟⎠

                               ⎛−1 1 ⎞⎟⎛ v1 ⎞⎟ ⎛0⎞⎟
For M1  2, this yield ⎜⎜               ⎟⎜ ⎟ = ⎜ ⎟ , which has a nontrivial solution
                               ⎜⎝ 4 −4⎟⎟⎠⎜⎜⎝v ⎟⎟⎠ ⎜⎜⎝0⎟⎟⎠
                                             2
( v1, v2 )  (1, 1), or any scalar multiple thereof. (Of course, any multiple of an eigen-
vector is always an eigenvector; we try to pick the simplest multiple, but any one
                                                                       ⎛4 1⎞⎟⎛ v1 ⎞⎟ ⎛0⎞⎟
will do.) Similarly, for M2  3, the eigenvector equation becomes ⎜⎜         ⎟⎜ ⎟ = ⎜ ⎟ ,
                                                                       ⎜⎝4 1⎟⎟⎠⎜⎜⎝v ⎟⎟⎠ ⎜⎜⎝0⎟⎟⎠
                                                                                   2

which has a nontrivial solution ( v1 , v2 )  (1, 4). In summary,

                ⎛1⎞                 ⎛1⎞
          v1 = ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟⎟ ,      v 2 = ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟⎟.
                ⎜⎝1⎟⎠               ⎜⎝−4⎟⎠

  Next we write the general solution as a linear combination of eigensolutions.
From (6), the general solution is

                      ⎛1⎞              ⎛1⎞
          x(t ) = c1 ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟⎟ e 2t + c2 ⎜⎜ ⎟⎟⎟ e−3t .                              (7)
                      ⎜⎝1⎟⎠            ⎜⎝−4⎟⎠

Finally, we compute c1 and c2 to satisfy the initial condition ( x0 , y0 )  (2, 3). At
t  0, (7) becomes


                                         5.2 CLASSIFICATION OF LINEAR SYSTEMS             133
         ⎛ 2 ⎞⎟      ⎛⎞       ⎛ ⎞
         ⎜⎜ ⎟ = c ⎜⎜1⎟⎟ + c ⎜⎜ 1 ⎟⎟ ,
          ⎜⎝−3⎟⎟⎠ 1 ⎜⎝1⎟⎟⎠ 2 ⎜⎝−4⎟⎟⎠

which is equivalent to the algebraic system

          2  c1 c2 ,
         3  c1  4c2 .

The solution is c1  1, c2  1. Substituting back into (7) yields

         x ( t )  e2t e 3t ,
         y ( t )  e2t  4e 3t

for the solution to the initial value problem. ■
   Whew! Fortunately we don’t need to go through all this to draw the phase por-
trait of a linear system. All we need to know are the eigenvectors and eigenvalues.


EXAMPLE 5.2.2:

Draw the phase portrait for the system of Example 5.2.1.
   Solution: The system has eigenvalues M1  2, M2  3. Hence the first eigenso-
lution grows exponentially, and the second eigensolution decays. This means the
origin is a saddle point. Its stable manifold is the line spanned by the eigenvector
v2  (1, 4), corresponding to the decaying eigensolution. Similarly, the unstable
manifold is the line spanned by v1  (1, 1). As with all saddle points, a typical tra-
jectory approaches the unstable manifold as t l d, and the stable manifold as
t l d. Figure 5.2.2 shows the phase portrait. ■

                                             y




                                                                    x




                    Figure 5.2.2




134       LINEAR SYSTEMS
EXAMPLE 5.2.3:

Sketch a typical phase portrait for the case M2  M  0.
   Solution: First suppose M2  M1  0. Then both eigensolutions decay exponen-
tially. The fixed point is a stable node, as in Figures 5.1.5a and 5.1.5c, except now
                                                   the eigenvectors are not mutually per-
               y               slow eigendirection
                                                   pendicular, in general. Trajectories
                                                   typically approach the origin tangent
                                                   to the slow eigendirection, defined as
                                                   the direction spanned by the eigen-
                                  x                vector with the smaller |M|. In back-
                                                   wards time ( t l d), the trajectories
                                                   become parallel to the fast eigendi-
                                                   rection. Figure 5.2.3 shows the phase
                     fast eigendirection           portrait. (If we reverse all the arrows
                                                   in Figure 5.2.3, we obtain a typical
Figure 5.2.3
                                                   phase portrait for an unstable node.) ■


EXAMPLE 5.2.4:

What happens if the eigenvalues are complex numbers?
   Solution: If the eigenvalues are complex, the fixed point is either a center
(Figure 5.2.4a) or a spiral (Figure 5.2.4b). We’ve already seen an example of a
                                                    center in the simple harmonic
                                                    oscillator of Section 5.1; the ori-
                                                    gin is surrounded by a family of
                                                    closed orbits. Note that centers
                                                    are neutrally stable, since nearby
                                                    trajectories are neither attracted
                                                    to nor repelled from the fixed
                                                    point. A spiral would occur if
     (a) center                   (b) spiral
                                                    the harmonic oscillator were
Figure 5.2.4
                                                    lightly damped. Then the tra-
                                                    jectory would just fail to close,
because the oscillator loses a bit of energy on each cycle.
   To justify these statements, recall that the eigenvalues are


                  (
         λ 1,2 = 12 τ ± τ 2 − 4Δ .)
   Thus complex eigenvalues occur when

         U2  4%  0 .



                               5.2 CLASSIFICATION OF LINEAR SYSTEMS                  135
To simplify the notation, let’s write the eigenvalues as

         M1,2  Bo iX
where

         B  U / 2, ω = 12 4Δ − τ 2 .
By assumption, X v 0. Then the eigenvalues are distinct and so the general solution
is still given by

                      Mt          M t
          x(t ) = c1e 1 v1 + c2 e 2 v 2 .
But now the c’s and v’s are complex, since the M’s are. This means that x( t ) involves
linear combinations of e ( BoiX ) t. By Euler’s formula, eiXt  cos Xt i sin Xt. Hence
x( t ) is a combination of terms involving e Bt cos Xt and e Bt sin Xt. Such terms repre-
sent exponentially decaying oscillations if B  Re( M )  0 and growing oscillations if
B  0. The corresponding fixed points are stable and unstable spirals, respectively.
Figure 5.2.4b shows the stable case.
    If the eigenvalues are pure imaginary (B  0), then all the solutions are periodic
with period T  2QX. The oscillations have fixed amplitude and the fixed point
is a center.
    For both centers and spirals, it’s easy to determine whether the rotation is clock-
wise or counterclockwise; just compute a few vectors in the vector field and the
sense of rotation should be obvious. ■


EXAMPLE 5.2.5:

In our analysis of the general case, we have been assuming that the eigenvalues are
distinct. What happens if the eigenvalues are equal ?
   Solution: Suppose M1  M2  M. There are two possibilities: either there are two
independent eigenvectors corresponding to M, or there’s only one.
   If there are two independent eigenvectors, then they span the plane and so every
vector is an eigenvector with this same eigenvalue M. To see this, write an arbitrary
                               vector x0 as a linear combination of the two eigenvec-
                               tors: x0  c1v1 c2v2. Then

                                   A x0 A ( c1v1      c2v2 )  c1Mv1   c2Mv2  Mx0
                                   so x0 is also an eigenvector with eigenvalue M. Since
                                   multiplication by A simply stretches every vector by a
                                   factor M, the matrix must be a multiple of the identity:

                                         ⎛M 0 ⎞⎟
                                    A = ⎜⎜        ⎟.
                                         ⎜⎝ 0 M ⎟⎟⎠
Figure 5.2.5



136        LINEAR SYSTEMS
Then if M v 0, all trajectories are straight lines through the origin (x( t )  e Mt x0 )
and the fixed point is a star node (Figure 5.2.5). On the other hand, if M  0, the
whole plane is filled with fixed points! (No surprise—the system is x  0. )
   The other possibility is that there’s only one eigenvector (more accurately, the
eigenspace corresponding to M is one-dimensional.) For example, any matrix of the
          ⎛M b ⎞⎟
form A = ⎜⎜        ⎟ , with b v 0 has only a one-dimensional eigenspace (Exercise 5.2.11).
          ⎜⎝ 0 M ⎟⎟⎠

    When there’s only one eigendirection, the fixed point is a degenerate node. A
typical phase portrait is shown in Figure 5.2.6. As t l d and also as t l d,
all trajectories become parallel to the one available eigendirection.




                                                          eigendirection




                  Figure 5.2.6


   A good way to think about the degenerate node is to imagine that it has been
created by deforming an ordinary node. The ordinary node has two independent
eigendirections; all trajectories are parallel to the slow eigendirection as t l d,
and to the fast eigendirection as t l d (Figure 5.2.7a).

                                      fast

                                      slow




                     (a) node                              (b) degenerate node

           Figure 5.2.7


Now suppose we start changing the parameters of the system in such a way that the
two eigendirections are scissored together. Then some of the trajectories will get
squashed in the collapsing region between the two eigendirections, while the sur-
viving trajectories get pulled around to form the degenerate node (Figure 5.2.7b).




                                 5.2 CLASSIFICATION OF LINEAR SYSTEMS                137
  Another way to get intuition about this case is to realize that the degenerate
node is on the borderline between a spiral and a node. The trajectories are trying to
wind around in a spiral, but they don’t quite make it. ■

         Classification of Fixed Points
   By now you’re probably tired of all the examples and ready for a simple classifi-
cation scheme. Happily, there is one. We can show the type and stability of all the
different fixed points on a single diagram (Figure 5.2.8).

                              τ                                      τ2 − 4 Δ = 0
                                  unstable nodes


                                             unstable spirals

            saddle points                        centers               Δ
                                             stable spirals


                                  stable nodes
               non-isolated
               fixed points
                                           stars, degenerate nodes


            Figure 5.2.8


The axes are the trace U and the determinant % of the matrix A. All of the infor-
mation in the diagram is implied by the following formulas:


                 (
         λ 1,2= 12 τ ± τ 2 − 4Δ ,  )      %  M1M2 ,          U  M1     M2 .


The first equation is just (5). The second and third can be obtained by writing the
characteristic equation in the form ( M  M1 )( M  M2 )  M2  UM %  0.
    To arrive at Figure 5.2.8, we make the following observations:
    If %  0, the eigenvalues are real and have opposite signs; hence the fixed point
is a saddle point.
    If %  0, the eigenvalues are either real with the same sign (nodes), or com-
plex conjugate (spirals and centers). Nodes satisfy U2  4%  0 and spirals satisfy
U2  4%  0. The parabola U2  4%  0 is the borderline between nodes and spi-
rals; star nodes and degenerate nodes live on this parabola. The stability of the
nodes and spirals is determined by U. When U  0, both eigenvalues have nega-
tive real parts, so the fixed point is stable. Unstable spirals and nodes have U  0.
Neutrally stable centers live on the borderline U  0, where the eigenvalues are
purely imaginary.




138       LINEAR SYSTEMS
   If %  0, at least one of the eigenvalues is zero. Then the origin is not an isolated
fixed point. There is either a whole line of fixed points, as in Figure 5.1.5d, or a
plane of fixed points, if A  0.
   Figure 5.2.8 shows that saddle points, nodes, and spirals are the major types of
fixed points; they occur in large open regions of the ( %,U) plane. Centers, stars,
degenerate nodes, and non-isolated fixed points are borderline cases that occur
along curves in the ( %,U) plane. Of these borderline cases, centers are by far the
most important. They occur very commonly in frictionless mechanical systems
where energy is conserved.


EXAMPLE 5.2.6:
                                                                   ⎛1 2⎞⎟
Classify the fixed point x*  0 for the system x  Ax, where A = ⎜⎜      ⎟.
                                                                   ⎜⎝3 4⎟⎟⎠
  Solution: The matrix has %  2; hence the fixed point is a saddle point. ■


EXAMPLE 5.2.7:
                            ⎛2 1⎞⎟
Redo Example 5.2.6 for A = ⎜⎜      ⎟.
                            ⎜⎝3 4⎟⎟⎠

  Solution: Now %  5 and U  6. Since %  0 and U2  4%  16  0, the fixed
point is a node. It is unstable, since U  0. ■


5.3     Love Affairs
To arouse your interest in the classification of linear systems, we now discuss a
simple model for the dynamics of love affairs (Strogatz 1988). The following story
illustrates the idea.
    Romeo is in love with Juliet, but in our version of this story, Juliet is a fickle
lover. The more Romeo loves her, the more Juliet wants to run away and hide. But
when Romeo gets discouraged and backs off, Juliet begins to find him strangely
attractive. Romeo, on the other hand, tends to echo her: he warms up when she
loves him, and grows cold when she hates him.
    Let

         R ( t )  Romeo’s love / hate for Juliet at time t
         J ( t )  Juliet’s love / hate for Romeo at time t.




                                                          5.3   LOVE AFFAIRS       139

