=== PDF pages 175-189 (printed 160-174) ===
stable manifold are traditionally called separatrices. Basins and their boundaries
are important because they partition the phase space into regions of different long-
term behavior.


6.5 Conservative Systems
Newton’s law F  ma is the source of many important second-order systems. For
example, consider a particle of mass m moving along the x-axis, subject to a non-
linear force F ( x ). Then the equation of motion is

          mx = F (x ).
Notice that we are assuming that F is independent of both x and t; hence there is
no damping or friction of any kind, and there is no time-dependent driving force.
    Under these assumptions, we can show that energy is conserved, as follows. Let
V ( x ) denote the potential energy, defined by F ( x )  dV / dx. Then

                   dV
          mx +      = 0.                                               (1)
                   dx

Now comes a trick worth remembering: multiply both sides by x and notice that
the left-hand side becomes an exact time-derivative!

                    dV         d
             +
          mxx          x = 0 ⇒ ⎡⎣⎢ 12 mx 2 +V ( x )⎤⎦⎥ = 0
                    dx         dt

where we’ve used the chain rule

          d               dV dx
             V ( x(t )) 
          dt              dx dt

in reverse. Hence, for a given solution x ( t ), the total energy

          E = 12 mx 2 +V ( x )
is constant as a function of time. The energy is often called a conserved quantity,
a constant of motion, or a first integral. Systems for which a conserved quantity
exists are called conservative systems.
    Let’s be a bit more general and precise. Given a system x  f ( x ), a conserved
quantity is a real-valued continuous function E(x) that is constant on trajectories,
i.e. dE / dt  0. To avoid trivial examples, we also require that E (x) be nonconstant
on every open set. Otherwise a constant function like E (x) w 0 would qualify as a
conserved quantity for every system, and so every system would be conservative!
Our caveat rules out this silliness.


160        PHASE PLANE
   The first example points out a basic fact about conservative systems.


EXAMPLE 6.5.1:

Show that a conservative system cannot have any attracting fixed points.
   Solution: Suppose x* were an attracting fixed point. Then all points in its basin
of attraction would have to be at the same energy E (x*) (because energy is constant
on trajectories and all trajectories in the basin flow to x*). Hence E (x) must be a con-
stant function for x in the basin. But this contradicts our definition of a conservative
system, in which we required that E (x) be nonconstant on all open sets. ■

  If attracting fixed points can’t occur, then what kind of fixed points can occur?
One generally finds saddles and centers, as in the next example.


EXAMPLE 6.5.2:

Consider a particle of mass m  1 moving in a double-well potential
V ( x ) = − 12 x 2 + 14 x 4 . Find and classify all the equilibrium points for the system.
Then plot the phase portrait and interpret the results physically.
   Solution: The force is dV / dx  x  x3, so the equation of motion is

          x = x − x3 .
This can be rewritten as the vector field

          x  y

          y = x − x3

where y represents the particle’s velocity. Equilibrium points occur where
(x , y )  (0, 0). Hence the equilibria are ( x*, y*)  (0, 0) and (o1, 0). To classify
these fixed points we compute the Jacobian:

               ⎛ 0         1⎞⎟
          A = ⎜⎜              ⎟.
               ⎜⎝1− 3x 2   0⎟⎟⎠

At (0, 0), we have %  1, so the origin is a saddle point. But when ( x*, y*) 
(o1, 0), we find U  0 , %  2; hence these equilibria are predicted to be centers.
   At this point you should be hearing warning bells—in Section 6.3 we saw that
small nonlinear terms can easily destroy a center predicted by the linear approxi-
mation. But that’s not the case here, because of energy conservation. The trajecto-
ries are closed curves defined by the contours of constant energy, i.e.,

          E = 12 y 2 − 12 x 2 + 14 x 4 = constant.


                                               6.5 CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS              161
   Figure 6.5.1 shows the trajectories corresponding to different values of E. To
decide which way the arrows point along the trajectories, we simply compute the
vector ( x , y ) at a few convenient locations. For example, x  0 and y  0 on the
positive y-axis, so the motion is to the right. The orientation of neighboring trajec-
tories follows by continuity.
   As expected, the system has a saddle point at (0, 0) and centers at (1, 0) and
(1, 0). Each of the neutrally stable centers is surrounded by a family of small
                         y                        closed orbits. There are also large
                                                  closed orbits that encircle all three
                                                  fixed points.
                                                      Thus solutions of the system are
                                             x    typically  periodic, except for the equi-
                                                  librium solutions and two very special
                                                  trajectories: these are the trajectories
                                                  that appear to start and end at the
                                                  origin. More precisely, these trajecto-
Figure 6.5.1                                      ries approach the origin as t l od.
                                                  Trajectories that start and end at the
same fixed point are called homoclinic orbits. They are common in conservative
systems, but are rare otherwise. Notice that a homoclinic orbit does not corre-
spond to a periodic solution, because the trajectory takes forever trying to reach
the fixed point.
   Finally, let’s connect the phase portrait to the motion of an undamped particle
in a double-well potential (Figure 6.5.2).
                                      The neutrally stable equilibria correspond to the
                                   particle at rest at the bottom of one of the wells, and
                                   the small closed orbits represent small oscillations
                                   about these equilibria. The large orbits represent
                                   more energetic oscillations that repeatedly take the
                                   particle back and forth over the hump. Do you see
                                   what the saddle point and the homoclinic orbits
Figure 6.5.2                       mean physically? ■


EXAMPLE 6.5.3:

Sketch the graph of the energy function E( x, y ) for Example 6.5.2.
   Solution: The graph of E ( x, y ) is shown in Figure 6.5.3. The energy E is plotted
above each point ( x, y ) of the phase plane. The resulting surface is often called the
energy surface for the system.




162        PHASE PLANE
                         E


                    y



                                              x

          Figure 6.5.3


    Figure 6.5.3 shows that the local minima of E project down to centers in the
phase plane. Contours of slightly higher energy correspond to the small orbits
surrounding the centers. The saddle point and its homoclinic orbits lie at even
higher energy, and the large orbits that encircle all three fixed points are the most
energetic of all.
    It’s sometimes helpful to think of the flow as occurring on the energy surface
itself, rather than in the phase plane. But notice—the trajectories must maintain a
constant height E, so they would run around the surface, not down it. ■

         Nonlinear Centers
   Centers are ordinarily very delicate but, as the examples above suggest, they
are much more robust when the system is conservative. We now present a theorem
about nonlinear centers in second-order conservative systems.
   The theorem says that centers occur at the local minima of the energy func-
tion. This is physically plausible—one expects neutrally stable equilibria and small
oscillations to occur at the bottom of any potential well, no matter what its shape.

          Theorem 6.5.1: (Nonlinear centers for conservative systems) Consider the
system x  f ( x ) , where x  ( x, y )  R2, and f is continuously differentiable.
Suppose there exists a conserved quantity E (x) and suppose that x* is an isolated
fixed point (i.e., there are no other fixed points in a small neighborhood surround-
ing x*). If x* is a local minimum of E, then all trajectories sufficiently close to x*
are closed.

         Ideas behind the proof: Since E is constant on trajectories, each trajectory
is contained in some contour of E. Near a local maximum or minimum, the con-
tours are closed. (We won’t prove this, but Figure 6.5.3 should make it seem obvi-
ous.) The only remaining question is whether the trajectory actually goes all the
way around the contour or whether it stops at a fixed point on the contour. But
because we’re assuming that x* is an isolated fixed point, there cannot be any fixed




                                           6.5 CONSERVATIVE SYSTEMS              163
points on contours sufficiently close to x*. Hence all trajectories in a sufficiently
small neighborhood of x* are closed orbits, and therefore x* is a center. ■

   Two remarks about this result:
          1. The theorem is valid for local maxima of E also. Just replace the
             function E by E, and maxima get converted to minima; then
             Theorem 6.5.1 applies.
          2. We need to assume that x* is isolated. Otherwise there are counterex-
             amples due to fixed points on the energy contour—see Exercise 6.5.12.

   Another theorem about nonlinear centers will be presented in the next section.


6.6      Reversible Systems
Many mechanical systems have time-reversal symmetry. This means that their
dynamics look the same whether time runs forward or backward. For example, if
you were watching a movie of an undamped pendulum swinging back and forth,
you wouldn’t see any physical absurdities if the movie were run backward.
   In fact, any mechanical system of the form mx  F ( x ) is symmetric under
time reversal. If we make the change of variables t l t, the second derivative x
stays the same and so the equation is unchanged. Of course, the velocity x would
be reversed. Let’s see what this means in the phase plane. The equivalent system is

          x  y
          y  m1 F ( x )

where y is the velocity. If we make the change of variables t l t and y l y,
both equations stay the same. Hence if ( x ( t ), y ( t )) is a solution, then so is ( x ( t ),
y ( t )). Therefore every trajectory has a twin: they differ only by time-reversal
and a reflection in the x-axis (Figure 6.6.1).

                                             y



                                                           x




                                  Figure 6.6.1


The trajectory above the x-axis looks just like the one below the x-axis, except the
arrows are reversed.



164         PHASE PLANE
   More generally, let’s define a reversible system to be any second-order system
that is invariant under t l t and y l y. For example, any system of the form

           x  f ( x, y )
           y  g ( x, y ),

where f is odd in y and g is even in y (i.e., f ( x, y )  f ( x, y ) and g ( x , y )  g ( x, y ))
is reversible.
    Reversible systems are different from conservative systems, but they have many
of the same properties. For instance, the next theorem shows that centers are
robust in reversible systems as well.

        Theorem 6.6.1: (Nonlinear centers for reversible systems) Suppose the ori-
gin x*  0 is a linear center for the continuously differentiable system

           x  f ( x, y )
           y  g ( x, y ),

and suppose that the system is reversible. Then sufficiently close to the origin, all
trajectories are closed curves.
           y
                                            Ideas behind the proof: Consider a trajectory that
                                  starts on the positive x-axis near the origin (Figure 6.6.2).
                              x   Sufficiently near the origin, the flow swirls around the
                                  origin, thanks to the dominant influence of the lin-
                                  ear center, and so the trajectory eventually intersects
                                  the negative x-axis. (This is the step where our proof
Figure 6.6.2                      lacks rigor, but the claim should seem plausible.) Now
                                  we use reversibility. By reflecting the trajectory across
            y                     the x-axis, and changing the sign of t, we obtain a twin
                                  trajectory with the same endpoints but with its arrow
                              x   reversed (Figure 6.6.3).

                                     Together the two trajectories form a closed orbit, as
                                  desired. Hence all trajectories sufficiently close to the
Figure 6.6.3                      origin are closed. ■


EXAMPLE 6.6.1:

Show that the system

                      x = y − y3
                       y = −x − y 2


                                                       6.6 REVERSIBLE SYSTEMS                    165
has a nonlinear center at the origin, and plot the phase portrait.
   Solution: We’ll show that the hypotheses of the theorem are satisfied. The
Jacobian at the origin is

              ⎛ 0 1 ⎞⎟
         A = ⎜⎜       ⎟.
              ⎜⎝−1 0⎟⎟⎠

This has U  0, %  0, so the origin is a linear center. Furthermore, the system
is reversible, since the equations are invariant under the transformation t l t,
y l y. By Theorem 6.6.1, the origin is a nonlinear center.
    The other fixed points of the system are (1, 1) and (1, 1). They are saddle
points, as is easily checked by computing the linearization. A computer-generated
phase portrait is shown in Figure 6.6.4. It looks like some exotic sea creature, per-
haps a manta ray. The reversibility symmetry is apparent. The trajectories above
the x-axis have twins below the x-axis, with arrows reversed.


                                        y




                                                              x




                    Figure 6.6.4


   Notice that the twin saddle points are joined by a pair of trajectories. They are
called heteroclinic trajectories or saddle connections. Like homoclinic orbits, het-
eroclinic trajectories are much more common in reversible or conservative systems
than in other types of systems. ■

   Although we have relied on the computer to plot Figure 6.6.4, it can be sketched
on the basis of qualitative reasoning alone. For example, the existence of the het-
eroclinic trajectories can be deduced rigorously using reversibility arguments
(Exercise 6.6.6). The next example illustrates the spirit of such arguments.




166       PHASE PLANE
EXAMPLE 6.6.2:

Using reversibility arguments alone, show that the system

          x = y
          y = x − x 2

has a homoclinic orbit in the half-plane x p 0.
   Solution: Consider the unstable manifold of the saddle point at the origin. This
manifold leaves the origin along the vector (1, 1), since this is the unstable eigen-
direction for the linearization. Hence, close to the origin, part of the unstable man-
ifold lies in the first quadrant x, y  0. Now imagine a phase point with coordi-
nates ( x ( t ), y ( t )) moving along the unstable manifold, starting from x, y small and
positive. At first, x ( t ) must increase since x = y > 0. Also, y ( t ) increases initially,
                                    since y = x − x 2 > 0 for small x. Thus the phase
            y                       point moves up and to the right. Its horizontal veloc-
                                    ity is continually increasing, so at some time it must
                               x cross the vertical line x  1. Then y  0 so y ( t )
                          1
                                    decreases, eventually reaching y  0. Figure 6.6.5
                                    shows the situation.
                                       Now, by reversibility, there must be a twin trajec-
Figure 6.6.5                        tory  with the same endpoints but with arrow reversed
                                    (Figure 6.6.6). Together the two trajectories form the
            y
                                    desired homoclinic orbit. ■

                           x        There is a more general definition of reversibility
                    1
                                which extends nicely to higher-order systems.
                                Consider any mapping R (x) of the phase space to
                                itself that satisfies R 2 (x)  x. In other words, if the
Figure 6.6.6                    mapping is applied twice, all points go back to where
                                they started. In our two-dimensional examples, a
reflection about the x-axis (or any axis through the origin) has this property. Then
the system x  f ( x ) is reversible if it is invariant under the change of variables
t l t, x l R (x).
   Our next example illustrates this more general notion of reversibility, and also
highlights the main difference between reversible and conservative systems.


EXAMPLE 6.6.3:

Show that the system

          x = −2 cos x − cos y
          y = −2 cos y − cos x


                                                   6.6 REVERSIBLE SYSTEMS                167
is reversible, but not conservative. Then plot the phase portrait.
    Solution: The system is invariant under the change of variables t l t, x l x,
and y l y. Hence the system is reversible, with R (x, y )  (x, y ) in the preced-
ing notation.
    To show that the system is not conservative, it suffices to show that it has an
attracting fixed point. (Recall that a conservative system can never have an attract-
ing fixed point—see Example 6.5.1.)
    The fixed points satisfy 2 cos x  cos y and 2 cos y  cos x. Solving these
equations simultaneously yields cos x*  cos y*  0. Hence there are four fixed
points, given by ( x*, y*) = (± Q2 , ± Q2 ) .
    We claim that ( x*, y*) = (− Q2 , − Q2 ) is an attracting fixed point. The Jacobian
there is

               ⎛2 sin x *    sin y * ⎞⎟ ⎛⎜−2 −1⎞⎟
          A = ⎜⎜                       ⎟=⎜         ⎟,
               ⎜⎝sin x *    2 sin y *⎟⎟⎠ ⎜⎝−1 − 2⎟⎟⎠

which has U  4, %  3, U2  4%  4. Therefore the fixed point is a stable node.
This shows that the system is not conservative.
                y
                                           The other three fixed points can be
                                       shown to be an unstable node and two sad-
                                       dles. A computer-generated phase portrait
                                       is shown in Figure 6.6.7. To see the revers-
                                       ibility symmetry, compare the dynamics at
                                   x   any two points ( x, y ) and R ( x, y ) 
                                       ( x, y ). The trajectories look the same,
                                       but the arrows are reversed. In particular,
                                       the stable node at ( Q2 ,  Q2 ) is the twin of
                                            the unstable node at ( Q2 , Q2 ) . ■

                                             The system in Example 6.6.3 is closely
Figure 6.6.7
                                         related to a model of two superconducting
Josephson junctions coupled through a resistive load (Tsang et al. 1991). For fur-
ther discussion, see Exercise 6.6.9 and Example 8.7.4. Reversible, nonconservative
systems also arise in the context of lasers (Politi et al. 1986) and fluid flows (Stone,
Nadim, and Strogatz 1991 and Exercise 6.6.8).


6.7 Pendulum
Do you remember the first nonlinear system you ever studied in school? It was
probably the pendulum. But in elementary courses, the pendulum’s essential non-
linearity is sidestepped by the small-angle approximation sin R x R. Enough of



168        PHASE PLANE
that! In this section we use phase plane methods to analyze the pendulum, even in
the dreaded large-angle regime where the pendulum whirls over the top.
   In the absence of damping and external driving, the motion of a pendulum is
governed by

          d 2R g
              + sin R = 0                                                    (1)
          dt 2 L

                            where R is the angle from the downward vertical, g is the
                     g
    L                       acceleration due to gravity, and L is the length of the pendu-
θ                           lum (Figure 6.7.1).
         m
                               We nondimensionalize (1) by introducing a frequency
                             X  g L and a dimensionless time τ  ωt. Then the
Figure 6.7.1                equation becomes

          R + sin R = 0                                                    (2)
where the overdot denotes differentiation with respect to U. The corresponding
system in the phase plane is

          R  v                                                             (3a)
          v = −sin R                                                        (3b)

where v is the (dimensionless) angular velocity.
   The fixed points are ( R*, v*)  ( kQ, 0), where k is any integer. There’s no physical
difference between angles that differ by 2Q, so we’ll concentrate on the two fixed
points (0, 0) and ( Q, 0). At (0, 0), the Jacobian is

               ⎛ 0 1 ⎞⎟
          A = ⎜⎜       ⎟
               ⎜⎝−1 0⎟⎟⎠

so the origin is a linear center.
   In fact, the origin is a nonlinear center, for two reasons. First, the system (3) is
reversible: the equations are invariant under the transformation U l U , v l v .
Then Theorem 6.6.1 implies that the origin is a nonlinear center.
   Second, the system is also conservative. Multiplying (2) by R and integrating
yields
          R(R + sin R ) = 0 ⇒ 12 R2 − cos R = constant.
The energy function

          E (R, v ) = 12 v 2 − cos R                                         (4)




                                                             6.7   PENDULUM          169
has a local minimum at (0, 0), since E ≈ 12 (v 2 + R 2 ) −1 for small ( R, v ). Hence
Theorem 6.5.1 provides a second proof that the origin is a nonlinear center. (This
argument also shows that the closed orbits are approximately circular, with
R 2 v2 x 2( E 1).)
   Now that we’ve beaten the origin to death, consider the fixed point at ( Q, 0). The
Jacobian is

              ⎛0 1⎞⎟
         A = ⎜⎜      ⎟.
              ⎜⎝1 0⎟⎟⎠

The characteristic equation is M2  1  0. Therefore M1  1, M2  1; the fixed point
is a saddle. The corresponding eigenvectors are v1  (1, 1) and v2  (1 , 1).
    The phase portrait near the fixed points can be sketched from the information
obtained so far (Figure 6.7.2).

                                         v


                                                          θ




                          Figure 6.7.2


To fill in the picture, we include the energy contours E = 12 v 2 − cos R for different
values of E. The resulting phase portrait is shown in Figure 6.7.3. The picture is
periodic in the R-direction, as we’d expect.

                                         v




                                                                    θ




                Figure 6.7.3


   Now for the physical interpretation. The center corresponds to a state of neu-
trally stable equilibrium, with the pendulum at rest and hanging straight down.
This is the lowest possible energy state ( E  1). The small orbits surrounding
the center represent small oscillations about equilibrium, traditionally called



170       PHASE PLANE
librations. As E increases, the orbits grow. The critical case is E  1, corresponding
to the heteroclinic trajectories joining the saddles in Figure 6.7.3. The saddles rep-
resent an inverted pendulum at rest; hence the heteroclinic trajectories represent
delicate motions in which the pendulum slows to a halt precisely as it approaches
the inverted position. For E  1, the pendulum whirls repeatedly over the top.
These rotations should also be regarded as periodic solutions, since R  Q and
R  Q are the same physical position.

         Cylindrical Phase Space
   The phase portrait for the pendulum is more illuminating when wrapped onto
the surface of a cylinder (Figure 6.7.4). In fact, a cylinder is the natural phase space
for the pendulum, because it incorporates the fundamental geometric difference
between v and R: the angular velocity v is a real number, whereas R is an angle.




                                                         E >1

                                                         E =1
                       v
                                                         E = −1

                                                         E =1

                                                         E >1




                                              θ

                       Figure 6.7.4


   There are several advantages to the cylindrical representation. Now the peri-
odic whirling motions look periodic—they are the closed orbits that encircle the
cylinder for E  1. Also, it becomes obvious that the saddle points in Figure 6.7.3
are all the same physical state (an inverted pendulum at rest). The heteroclinic tra-
jectories of Figure 6.7.3 become homoclinic orbits on the cylinder.
   There is an obvious symmetry between the top and bottom half of Figure 6.7.4.
For example, both homoclinic orbits have the same energy and shape. To highlight
this symmetry, it is interesting (if a bit mind-boggling at first) to plot the energy
vertically instead of the angular velocity v (Figure 6.7.5). Then the orbits on the
cylinder remain at constant height, while the cylinder gets bent into a U-tube. The
two arms of the tube are distinguished by the sense of rotation of the pendulum,



                                                          6.7   PENDULUM           171
either clockwise or counterclockwise. At low energies, this distinction no longer
exists; the pendulum oscillates to and fro. The homoclinic orbits lie at E  1, the
borderline between rotations and librations.

                   clockwise            counterclockwise
                    whirling               whirling




                                                                rotations




                                                                E=1

                                                                librations

                                                                E = −1

                  Figure 6.7.5


   At first you might think that the trajectories are drawn incorrectly on one of the
arms of the U-tube. It might seem that the arrows for clockwise and counterclock-
wise motions should go in opposite directions. But if you think about the coordi-
nate system shown in Figure 6.7.6, you’ll see that the picture is correct.

       θ                                     θ                                            θ
bottom                                        top                    top

                                                                         θ =π          θ =0


       θ=0          θ=π           θ=π     θ =0
                                                                                v =0
                                                                     v
                                                     bend and
                                                     stretch
                           v =0
v increasing
                                                                  bottom

Figure 6.7.6


   The point is that the direction of increasing R has reversed when the bot-
tom of the cylinder is bent around to form the U-tube. (Please understand that
Figure 6.7.6 shows the coordinate system, not the actual trajectories; the trajecto-
ries were shown in Figure 6.7.5.)

172            PHASE PLANE
         Damping
   Now let’s return to the phase plane, and suppose that we add a small amount of
linear damping to the pendulum. The governing equation becomes

         R + bR + sin R = 0
where b  0 is the damping strength. Then centers become stable spirals while sad-
dles remain saddles. A computer-generated phase portrait is shown in Figure 6.7.7.




                       Figure 6.7.7

   The picture on the U-tube is clearer. All trajectories continually lose altitude,
except for the fixed points (Figure 6.7.8).

                 clockwise            counterclockwise
                  whirling               whirling




                                                               rotations




                                                                E =1

                                                                librations

                                                               E = −1

               Figure 6.7.8


We can see this explicitly by computing the change in energy along a trajectory:

         dE   d 1 2
            =
         dτ dτ 2
                ( θ − cos θ ) = θ(θ + sin θ ) = −bθ2 ≤ 0.

                                                         6.7     PENDULUM       173
Hence E decreases monotonically along trajectories, except at fixed points where
 R w 0.
    The trajectory shown in Figure 6.7.8 has the following physical interpretation:
the pendulum is initially whirling clockwise. As it loses energy, it has a harder time
rotating over the top. The corresponding trajectory spirals down the arm of the
U-tube until E  1; then the pendulum doesn’t have enough energy to whirl, and
so it settles down into a small oscillation about the bottom. Eventually the motion
damps and the pendulum comes to rest at its stable equilibrium.
    This example shows how far we can go with pictures—without invoking any
difficult formulas, we were able to extract all the important features of the pen-
dulum’s dynamics. It would be much more difficult to obtain these results analyt-
ically, and much more confusing to interpret the formulas, even if we could find
them.


6.8 Index Theory
In Section 6.3 we learned how to linearize a system about a fixed point. Linearization
is a prime example of a local method: it gives us a detailed microscopic view of the
trajectories near a fixed point, but it can’t tell us what happens to the trajectories
after they leave that tiny neighborhood. Furthermore, if the vector field starts with
quadratic or higher-order terms, the linearization tells us nothing.
    In this section we discuss index theory, a method that provides global informa-
tion about the phase portrait. It enables us to answer such questions as: Must a
closed trajectory always encircle a fixed point? If so, what types of fixed points are
permitted? What types of fixed points can coalesce in bifurcations? The method
also yields information about the trajectories near higher-order fixed points.
Finally, we can sometimes use index arguments to rule out the possibility of closed
orbits in certain parts of the phase plane.

         The Index of a Closed Curve
   The index of a closed curve C is an integer that measures the winding of the
vector field on C. The index also provides information about any fixed points that
might happen to lie inside the curve, as we’ll see.
   This idea may remind you of a concept in electrostatics. In that subject, one
often introduces a hypothetical closed surface (a “Gaussian surface”) to probe
a configuration of electric charges. By studying the behavior of the electric field
on the surface, one can determine the total amount of charge inside the surface.
Amazingly, the behavior on the surface tells us what’s happening far away inside
the surface! In the present context, the electric field is analogous to our vector field,
the Gaussian surface is analogous to the curve C, and the total charge is analogous
to the index.




174        PHASE PLANE

