=== PDF pages 213-227 (printed 198-212) ===
          7
           LIMIT CYCLES




7.0 Introduction
A limit cycle is an isolated closed trajectory. Isolated means that neighboring
trajectories are not closed; they spiral either toward or away from the limit cycle
(Figure 7.0.1).




                 stable                       unstable                   half -stable
                 limit cycle                  limit cycle                limit cycle


  Figure 7.0.1


If all neighboring trajectories approach the limit cycle, we say the limit cycle is
stable or attracting. Otherwise the limit cycle is unstable, or in exceptional cases,
half-stable.
    Stable limit cycles are very important scientifically—they model systems that
exhibit self-sustained oscillations. In other words, these systems oscillate even in
the absence of external periodic forcing. Of the countless examples that could be
given, we mention only a few: the beating of a heart; the periodic firing of a pace-
maker neuron; daily rhythms in human body temperature and hormone secretion;
chemical reactions that oscillate spontaneously; and dangerous self-excited vibra-
tions in bridges and airplane wings. In each case, there is a standard oscillation
of some preferred period, waveform, and amplitude. If the system is perturbed
slightly, it always returns to the standard cycle.




198        LIMIT CYCLES
    Limit cycles are inherently nonlinear phenomena; they can’t occur in linear sys-
tems. Of course, a linear system x  Ax can have closed orbits, but they won’t be
isolated; if x( t ) is a periodic solution, then so is cx( t ) for any constant c v 0. Hence
x( t ) is surrounded by a one-parameter family of closed orbits (Figure 7.0.2).
                                    Consequently, the amplitude of a linear oscillation
                             cx(t)
                                    is set entirely by its initial conditions; any slight dis-
                         x(t)       turbance to the amplitude will persist forever. In
                                    contrast, limit cycle oscillations are determined by
                                    the structure of the system itself.
                                        The next section presents two examples of sys-
                                    tems with limit cycles. In the first case, the limit
                                    cycle is obvious by inspection, but normally it’s
                                    difficult to tell whether a given system has a limit
                                    cycle, or indeed any closed orbits, from the govern-
Figure 7.0.2                        ing equations alone. Sections 7.2-7.4 present some
                                    techniques for ruling out closed orbits or for prov-
ing their existence. The remainder of the chapter discusses analytical methods for
approximating the shape and period of a closed orbit and for studying its stability.


7.1     Examples
It’s straightforward to construct examples of limit cycles if we use polar coordinates.


EXAMPLE 7.1.1: A SIMPLE LIMIT CYCLE

Consider the system

          r = r(1− r 2 ),    R = 1                                            (1)
where r p 0. The radial and angular dynamics are uncoupled and so can be ana-
lyzed separately. Treating r = r(1− r 2 ) as a vector field on the line, we see that
r*  0 is an unstable fixed point and r*  1 is stable (Figure 7.1.1).

                              .
                              r




                                                              r
                                                   1



                              Figure 7.1.1




                                                                  7.1   EXAMPLES         199
                      y                     Hence, back in the phase plane, all tra-
                                            jectories (except r*  0) approach the
                                            unit circle r*  1 monotonically. Since
                                            the motion in the R-direction is simply
                                            rotation at constant angular velocity,
                                       x
                                            we see that all trajectories spiral asymp-
                                            totically toward a limit cycle at r  1
                                            (Figure 7.1.2).
                                               It is also instructive to plot solu-
                                            tions as functions of t. For instance, in
Figure 7.1.2
                                            Figure 7.1.3 we plot x ( t )  r ( t ) cosR ( t )
                                            for a trajectory starting outside the limit
cycle. As expected, the solution settles down to a sinusoidal oscillation of constant
amplitude, corresponding to the limit cycle solution x ( t )  cos ( t R0 ) of (1). ■
                          2



                  x


                          0                                               t
                                                                     25




                    −2


                  Figure 7.1.3




EXAMPLE 7.1.2: VAN DER POL OSCILLATOR

A less transparent example, but one that played a central role in the development
of nonlinear dynamics, is given by the van der Pol equation

           x   N( x 2 1)x    x0                                           (2)
where N p 0 is a parameter. Historically, this equation arose in connection with the
nonlinear electrical circuits used in the first radios (see Exercise 7.1.6 for the cir-
cuit). Equation (2) looks like a simple harmonic oscillator, but with a nonlinear
                    2
damping term N( x 1)x . This term acts like ordinary positive damping for |x| 
1, but like negative damping for |x| l. In other words, it causes large-amplitude
oscillations to decay, but it pumps them back up if they become too small.
   As you might guess, the system eventually settles into a self-sustained oscilla-
tion where the energy dissipated over one cycle balances the energy pumped in.


200        LIMIT CYCLES
This idea can be made rigorous, and with quite a bit of work, one can prove that
the van der Pol equation has a unique, stable limit cycle for each N  0. This result
follows from a more general theorem discussed in Section 7.4.
   To give a concrete illustration, suppose we numerically integrate (2) for N  1.5,
starting from ( x, x )  (0.5, 0) at t  0. Figure 7.1.4 plots the solution in the phase
plane and Figure 7.1.5 shows the graph of x ( t ). Now, in contrast to Example 7.1.1,
the limit cycle is not a circle and the stable waveform is not a sine wave. ■

                .
               x
                                            3
          3

                                        x

                             x              0                                        t
−3                       3                                  10              20


                    −3
                                         −3

Figure 7.1.4                            Figure 7.1.5




7.2 Ruling Out Closed Orbits
Suppose we have a strong suspicion, based on numerical evidence or otherwise,
that a particular system has no periodic solutions. How could we prove this? In the
last chapter we mentioned one method, based on index theory (see Examples 6.8.5
and 6.8.6). Now we present three other ways of ruling out closed orbits. They are
of limited applicability, but they’re worth knowing about, in case you get lucky.

          Gradient Systems
   Suppose the system can be written in the form x = −∇V , for some continu-
ously differentiable, single-valued scalar function V (x). Such a system is called a
gradient system with potential function V.
          Theorem 7.2.1: Closed orbits are impossible in gradient systems.

         Proof: Suppose there were a closed orbit. We obtain a contradiction by
considering the change in V after one circuit. On the one hand, %V  0 since V is
single-valued. But on the other hand,




                                        7.2     RULING OUT CLOSED ORBITS            201
                    T   dV
          ΔV = ∫            dt
                    0    dt
                    T
               = ∫ (∇V ⋅ x )dt
                    0
                        T
               = −∫
                                 2
                                x dt
                        0

               <0
(unless x w 0, in which case the trajectory is a fixed point, not a closed orbit). This
contradiction shows that closed orbits can’t exist in gradient systems. ■

   The trouble with Theorem 7.2.1 is that most two-dimensional systems are not
gradient systems. (Although, curiously, all vector fields on the line are gradient
systems; this gives another explanation for the absence of oscillations noted in
Sections 2.6 and 2.7.)


EXAMPLE 7.2.1:

Show that there are no closed orbits for the system x  sin y, y  x cos y.
   Solution: The system is a gradient system with potential function V ( x,y ) 
–x sin y, since x = −∂V ∂x and y = −∂V ∂y . By Theorem 7.2.1, there are no
closed orbits. ■

How can you tell whether a system is a gradient system? And if it is, how do you
find its potential function V ? See Exercises 7.2.5 and 7.2.6.
   Even if the system is not a gradient system, similar techniques may still work, as
in the following example. We examine the change in an energy-like function after
one circuit around the putative closed orbit, and derive a contradiction.


EXAMPLE 7.2.2:

Show that the nonlinearly damped oscillator x + ( x )3 + x = 0 has no periodic
solutions.
   Solution: Suppose that there were a periodic solution x ( t ) of period T. Consider
the energy function E (x, x ) = 12 ( x 2 + x 2 ). After one cycle, x and x return to their
starting values, and therefore %E  0 around any closed orbit.
                                      T
   On the other hand, ΔE =              ∫E dt. If we can show this integral is nonzero,
                                            0

we’ve reached a contradiction. Note that E = x (x + x) = x (−x 3 ) = −x 4 ≤ 0.
                            T
Therefore ΔE = −∫ ( x )4 dt ≤ 0, with equality only if x w 0. But x w 0 would
                            0

mean the trajectory is a fixed point, contrary to the original assumption that it’s a




202        LIMIT CYCLES
closed orbit. Thus %E is strictly negative, which contradicts %E  0. Hence there
are no periodic solutions. ■

         Liapunov Functions
   Even for systems that have nothing to do with mechanics, it is occasionally pos-
sible to construct an energy-like function that decreases along trajectories. Such a
function is called a Liapunov function. If a Liapunov function exists, then closed
orbits are forbidden, by the same reasoning as in Example 7.2.2.
   To be more precise, consider a system x  f ( x ) with a fixed point at x*. Suppose
that we can find a Liapunov function, i.e., a continuously differentiable, real-valued
function V (x) with the following properties:
         1. V (x)  0 for all x v x*, and V (x*)  0. (We say that V is positive definite.)
         2. V  0 for all x v x*. (All trajectories flow “downhill” toward x*.)

Then x* is globally asymptotically stable: for all initial conditions, x( t ) l x* as
t l d. In particular the system has no closed orbits. (For a proof, see Jordan and
Smith 1987.)
   The intuition is that all trajectories move monotonically down the graph of V (x)
toward x* (Figure 7.2.1).

                                                    V(x)


                                       x (t)


                                               x*

                                Figure 7.2.1


The solutions can’t get stuck anywhere else because if they did, V would stop
changing, but by assumption, V  0 everywhere except at x*.
  Unfortunately, there is no systematic way to construct Liapunov functions.
Divine inspiration is usually required, although sometimes one can work back-
wards. Sums of squares occasionally work, as in the following example.


EXAMPLE 7.2.3:

By constructing a Liapunov function, show that the system x = −x + 4 y,
y = −x − y3 has no closed orbits.
   Solution: Consider V ( x,y )  x2 ay2, where a is a parameter to be chosen later.
Then V = 2xx + 2ayy = 2 x(−x + 4y ) + 2ay(−x − y3 ) = −2x 2 + (8 − 2a )xy − 2ay 4 .




                                         7.2   RULING OUT CLOSED ORBITS               203
If we choose a  4, the xy term disappears and V = −2 x 2 − 8y 4 . By inspection,
V  0 and V  0 for all ( x,y ) v (0,0). Hence V  x2 4y2 is a Liapunov function
and so there are no closed orbits. In fact, all trajectories approach the origin as
t l d. ■

         Dulac’s Criterion
    The third method for ruling out closed orbits is based on Green’s theorem, and
is known as Dulac’s criterion.
                                  f ( x ) be a continuously differentiable vector
         Dulac’s Criterion: Let x
field defined on a simply connected subset R of the plane. If there exists a continu-
ously differentiable, real-valued function g (x) such that ∇⋅( gx ) has one sign
throughout R, then there are no closed orbits lying entirely in R.
         Proof: Suppose there were a closed orbit C lying entirely in the region R.
Let A denote the region inside C (Figure 7.2.2). Then Green’s theorem yields


         ∫∫ ∇⋅ ( g x )dA = ∫ g x ⋅ n d 
           A                   C

where n is the outward normal and d A is the element of arc length along C. Look
first at the double integral on the left: it must be nonzero, since ∇⋅( gx ) has one
sign in R. On the other hand, the line integral on the right equals zero since
 x ⋅ n = 0 everywhere, by the assumption that C is a trajectory (the tangent vector
 x is orthogonal to n). This contradiction implies that no such C can exist. ■


                                   n          C
                                                      R
                           .
                           x             A




                        Figure 7.2.2


    Dulac’s criterion suffers from the same drawback as Liapunov’s method: there
is no algorithm for finding g (x). Candidates that occasionally work are g  1,
1 / xayb, eax, and eay.


EXAMPLE 7.2.4:

Show that the system x = x( 2 − x − y ), y = y( 4x − x 2 − 3) has no closed orbits
in the positive quadrant x, y  0.



204       LIMIT CYCLES
   Solution: A hunch tells us to pick g  1 / xy. Then

                      ∂             ∂
          ∇⋅ ( g x ) =   ( gx ) + ( gy )
                      ∂x            ∂y
                      ∂ ⎛⎜ 2 − x − y ⎞⎟ ∂ ⎛⎜ 4x − x 2 − 3 ⎞⎟
                    =     ⎜            ⎟⎟ + ⎜              ⎟⎟
                      ∂x ⎜⎝       y     ⎟⎠ ∂y ⎜⎝ x          ⎠⎟
                    = −1 / y
                    < 0.
Since the region x, y  0 is simply connected and g and f satisfy the required
smoothness conditions, Dulac’s criterion implies there are no closed orbits in the
positive quadrant. ■


EXAMPLE 7.2.5:

Show that the system x  y, y = −x − y + x 2 + y 2 has no closed orbits.
  Solution: Let g  e2x. Then ∇⋅ ( gx ) = −2e−2 x y + e−2 x (−1 + 2 y ) = − e−2 x < 0.
By Dulac’s criterion, there are no closed orbits. ■


7.3      Poincaré−Bendixson Theorem
Now that we know how to rule out closed orbits, we turn to the opposite task:
finding methods to establish that closed orbits exist in particular systems. The fol-
lowing theorem is one of the few results in this direction. It is also one of the key
theoretical results in nonlinear dynamics, because it implies that chaos can’t occur
in the phase plane, as discussed briefly at the end of this section.
         Poincaré−Bendixson Theorem: Suppose that:
   (1)   R is a closed, bounded subset of the plane;
   (2)    x  f ( x ) is a continuously differentiable vector field on an open set con-
         taining R;
   (3)   R does not contain any fixed points; and
   (4)   There exists a trajectory C that is “confined” in R, in the sense that it
         starts in R and stays in R for all future time (Figure 7.3.1).
                                            Then either C is a closed orbit, or it spirals
                                            toward a closed orbit as t l d. In either
                                      R     case, R contains a closed orbit (shown as a
                               C
                                            heavy curve in Figure 7.3.1).
                P
                                               The proof of this theorem is subtle,
                                             and requires some advanced ideas from

Figure 7.3.1




                                     7.3 POINCARÉ-BENDIXSON THEOREM                  205
topology. For details, see Perko (1991), Coddington and Levinson (1955), Hurewicz
(1958), or Cesari (1963).
    In Figure 7.3.1, we have drawn R as a ring-shaped region because any closed
orbit must encircle a fixed point ( P in Figure 7.3.1) and no fixed points are allowed
in R.
    When applying the Poincaré-Bendixson theorem, it’s easy to satisfy conditions
(l)–(3); condition (4) is the tough one. How can we be sure that a confined trajectory
C exists? The standard trick is to construct a trapping region R, i.e., a closed con-
nected set such that the vector field points “inward” everywhere on the boundary
                                           of R (Figure 7.3.2). Then all trajectories
                                           in R are confined. If we can also arrange
                                           that there are no fixed points in R, then
                                           the Poincaré-Bendixson theorem ensures
                                           that R contains a closed orbit.
                                 R            The Poincaré-Bendixson theorem can
                                           be difficult to apply in practice. One con-
                                           venient case occurs when the system has
                                           a simple representation in polar coordi-
Figure 7.3.2                               nates, as in the following example.


EXAMPLE 7.3.1:

Consider the system

         r = r(1− r 2 ) + μr cos θ
                                                                            (1)
         θ = 1.
When N  0, there’s a stable limit cycle at r  1, as discussed in Example 7.1.1. Show
that a closed orbit still exists for N  0, as long as N is sufficiently small.
    Solution: We seek two concentric circles with radii rmin and rmax, such that r  0
on the outer circle and r  0 on the inner circle. Then the annulus 0  rmin
b r b rmax will be our desired trapping region. Note that there are no fixed points
in the annulus since R  0; hence if rmin and rmax can be found, the Poincaré-
Bendixson theorem will imply the existence of a closed orbit.
    To find rmin, we require r  r(l  r 2 ) μr cos R  0 for all R. Since cos R p –1, a
sufficient condition for rmin is 1 – r2 – N  0. Hence any rmin  1 μ will work, as
long as N  1 so that the square root makes sense. We should choose rmin as large as
possible, to hem in the limit cycle as tightly as we can. For instance, we could pick
rmin  0.999 1 μ . (Even rmin  1 μ works, but more careful reasoning is
required.) By a similar argument, the flow is inward on the outer circle if
 rmax  1.00l 1   μ.




206        LIMIT CYCLES
  Therefore a closed orbit exists for all N  1, and it lies somewhere in the annulus
0.999 1 μ  r  1.001 1 μ . ■

    The estimates used in Example 7.3.1 are conservative. In fact, the closed orbit
can exist even if N p 1. Figure 7.3.3 shows a computer-generated phase portrait of
(1) for N  1. In Exercise 7.3.8, you’re asked to explore what happens for larger N,
and in particular, whether there’s a critical N beyond which the closed orbit disap-
pears. It’s also possible to obtain some analytical insight about the closed orbit for
small N (Exercise 7.3.9).

                                       y


                                           1


                                                limit
                                                cycle
                                                                    x
                           −1                           1



                                           −1




               Figure 7.3.3


   When polar coordinates are inconvenient, we may still be able to find an appro-
priate trapping region by examining the system’s nullclines, as in the next example.


EXAMPLE 7.3.2:

In the fundamental biochemical process called glycolysis, living cells obtain energy
by breaking down sugar. In intact yeast cells as well as in yeast or muscle extracts,
glycolysis can proceed in an oscillatory fashion, with the concentrations of various
intermediates waxing and waning with a period of several minutes. For reviews,
see Chance et al. (1973) or Goldbeter (1980).
   A simple model of these oscillations has been proposed by Sel’kov (1968). In
dimensionless form, the equations are

         x = −x + ay + x 2 y
         y = b − ay − x 2 y




                                 7.3 POINCARÉ-BENDIXSON THEOREM                  207
where x and y are the concentrations of ADP (adenosine diphosphate) and F6P
(fructose-6-phosphate), and a,b  0 are kinetic parameters. Construct a trapping
region for this system.
   Solution: First we find the nullclines. The first equation shows that x  0 on
the curve y  x / ( a x2 ) and the second equation shows that y  0 on the curve
y  b / ( a x2 ). These nullclines are sketched in Figure 7.3.4, along with some rep-
resentative vectors.
         y

               y = b / (a+x2 )



                                       .
                                       x> 0
                                       y<0
             .
             x> 0
             .
             y>0




                .
                x< 0                                            y = x /(a+x2 )
                .                              .       .
                y>0                            x < 0 , y <0
                                                                           x
         Figure 7.3.4

How did we know how to sketch these vectors? By definition, the arrows are verti-
cal on the x  0 nullcline, and horizontal on the y  0 nullcline. The direction of
flow is determined by the signs of x and y . For instance, in the region above both
nullclines, the governing equations imply x  0 and y  0 , so the arrows point
down and to the right, as shown in Figure 7.3.4.
    Now consider the region bounded by the dashed line shown in Figure 7.3.5. We
claim that it’s a trapping region. To verify this, we have to show that all the vectors
on the boundary point into the box. On the horizontal and vertical sides, there’s no
problem: the claim follows from Figure 7.3.4. The tricky part of the construction
is the diagonal line of slope –1 extending from the point ( b, b / a ) to the nullcline
y  x / ( a x2 ). Where did this come from?




208       LIMIT CYCLES
           y
                       (b, b / a)
        b/a




                   y = b / (a+x2 )




                                                         2
                                            y = x/ (a+x )



                                                                             x
                        b

        Figure 7.3.5

To get the right intuition, consider x and y in the limit of very large x. Then
 x x x 2 y and y ≈ −x 2 y , so y / x = dy dx ≈ −1 along trajectories. Hence the vec-
tor field at large x is roughly parallel to the diagonal line. This suggests that in a
more precise calculation, we should compare the sizes of x and y , for some
sufficiently large x.
    In particular, consider x − (−y ) . We find

         x − (−y ) = − x + ay + x 2 y + ( b − ay − x 2 y )
                     = b − x.

Hence

         −y > x if x > b.
This inequality implies that the vector field points inward on the diagonal line in
Figure 7.3.5, because dy / dx is more negative than –1, and therefore the vectors are
steeper than the diagonal line. Thus the region is a trapping region, as claimed. ■

  Can we conclude that there is a closed orbit inside the trapping region? No!
There is a fixed point in the region (at the intersection of the nullclines), and so the
conditions of the Poincaré−Bendixson theorem are not satisfied. But if this fixed
point is a repeller, then we can prove the existence of a closed orbit by considering



                                     7.3 POINCARÉ-BENDIXSON THEOREM                209
the modified “punctured” region shown in Figure 7.3.6. (The hole is infinitesimal,
but drawn larger for clarity.)
           y




                                                                          x
          Figure 7.3.6

The repeller drives all neighboring trajectories into the shaded region, and since
this region is free of fixed points, the Poincaré-Bendixson theorem applies.
   Now we find conditions under which the fixed point is a repeller.


EXAMPLE 7.3.3:

Once again, consider the glycolytic oscillator x = −x + ay + x 2 y, y = b − ay − x 2 y
of Example 7.3.2. Prove that a closed orbit exists if a and b satisfy an appropriate
condition, to be determined. (As before, a,b  0.)
   Solution: By the argument above, it suffices to find conditions under which the
fixed point is a repeller, i.e., an unstable node or spiral. In general, the Jacobian is

               ⎛−1 + 2 xy  a + x 2 ⎞⎟
         A = ⎜⎜⎜                       ⎟⎟.
               ⎜⎝ −2 xy   −( a + x 2 )⎟⎠

After some algebra, we find that at the fixed point

                                  b
         x* = b,         y* =          ,
                                a + b2

the Jacobian has determinant %  a           b2  0 and trace



210       LIMIT CYCLES
                b 4 + ( 2a −1)b 2 + ( a + a 2 )
         U =−                                   .
                            a + b2

Hence the fixed point is unstable for U  0, and stable for U  0. The dividing line
U  0 occurs when

                (
         b 2 = 12 1− 2a ± 1− 8a .    )
This defines a curve in ( a,b ) space, as shown in Figure 7.3.7.

                     1.2

                       1

                     0.8

                     0.6                 stable
                b                        limit cycle
                     0.4
                                                        stable
                     0.2                                fixed point

                       0
                           0   0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08       0.1   0.12 0.14
                                             a

                Figure 7.3.7


For parameters in the region corresponding to U  0, we are guaranteed that the
system has a closed orbit—numerical integration shows that it is actually a stable
limit cycle. Figure 7.3.8 shows a computer-generated phase portrait for the typical
case a  0.08, b  0.6. ■

                       y



                      2



                      1



                                                                      x
                                    1               2      3


                    Figure 7.3.8




                                    7.3 POINCARÉ-BENDIXSON THEOREM              211
         No Chaos in the Phase Plane
   The Poincaré-Bendixson theorem is one of the central results of nonlinear
dynamics. It says that the dynamical possibilities in the phase plane are very lim-
ited: if a trajectory is confined to a closed, bounded region that contains no fixed
points, then the trajectory must eventually approach a closed orbit. Nothing more
complicated is possible.
   This result depends crucially on the two-dimensionality of the plane. In
higher-dimensional systems ( n p 3), the Poincaré-Bendixson theorem no longer
applies, and something radically new can happen: trajectories may wander around
forever in a bounded region without settling down to a fixed point or a closed orbit.
In some cases, the trajectories are attracted to a complex geometric object called a
strange attractor, a fractal set on which the motion is aperiodic and sensitive to tiny
changes in the initial conditions. This sensitivity makes the motion unpredictable
in the long run. We are now face to face with chaos. We’ll discuss this fascinating
topic soon enough, but for now you should appreciate that the Poincaré-Bendixson
theorem implies that chaos can never occur in the phase plane.


7.4 Liénard Systems
In the early days of nonlinear dynamics, say from about 1920 to 1950, there was a
great deal of research on nonlinear oscillations. The work was initially motivated
by the development of radio and vacuum tube technology, and later it took on a
mathematical life of its own. It was found that many oscillating circuits could be
modeled by second-order differential equations of the form

         x + f ( x )x + g ( x ) = 0,                                   (1)

now known as Liénard’s equation. This equation is a generalization of the van der
Pol oscillator x μ( x 2 1)x x  0 mentioned in Section 7.1. It can also be
interpreted mechanically as the equation of motion for a unit mass subject to a
nonlinear damping force  f ( x )x and a nonlinear restoring force g ( x ).
   Liénard’s equation is equivalent to the system

         x = y
                                                                          (2)
         y = −g ( x ) − f ( x ) y.

The following theorem states that this system has a unique, stable limit cycle under
appropriate hypotheses on f and g. For a proof, see Jordan and Smith (1987),
Grimshaw (1990), or Perko (1991).
         Liénard’s Theorem: Suppose that f ( x ) and g ( x ) satisfy the following
conditions:



212       LIMIT CYCLES

