=== PDF pages 334-340 (printed 319-325) ===
         Torque Balance
    The rotation of the wheel is governed by Newton’s law F  ma, expressed as a
balance between the applied torques and the rate of change of angular momentum.
Let I denote the moment of inertia of the wheel. Note that in general I depends on
t, because the distribution of water does. But this complication disappears if we
wait long enough: as t l d, one can show that I ( t ) l constant (Exercise 9.1.1).
Hence, after the transients decay, the equation of motion is

          I X  damping torque          gravitational torque.
    There are two sources of damping: viscous damping due to the heavy oil in the
brake, and a more subtle “inertial” damping caused by a spin-up effect—the water
enters the wheel at zero angular velocity but is spun up to angular velocity X before
it leaks out. Both of these effects produce torques proportional to X, so we have

         damping torque  –vX,
where v  0. The negative sign means that the damping opposes the motion.
  The gravitational torque is like that of an inverted pendulum, since water is
pumped in at the top of wheel (Figure 9.1.6).

                                     θ


                                     dθ
                      g                                  (top view)




                      Figure 9.1.6


In an infinitesimal sector dR, the mass dM  mdR. This mass element produces a
torque

         dU  ( dM ) gr sinR  mgr sinR dR.
To check that the sign is correct, observe that when sinR  0 the torque tends to
increase X, just as in an inverted pendulum. Here g is the effective gravitational
                                            constant, given by g  g0 sin B where
                        wheel               g0 is the usual gravitational constant
g0                              (side view) and B is the tilt of the wheel from hor-
                α                           izontal (Figure 9.1.7). Integration over
                                            all mass elements yields

Figure 9.1.7




                                               9.1   A CHAOTIC WATERWHEEL        315
                                                     2π
          gravitational torque = gr ∫                     m(θ, t )sin θ d θ.
                                                 0



Putting it all together, we obtain the torque balance equation

                                  2π
          I ω = −vω + gr ∫            m(θ, t )sin θ d θ.                                    (3)
                              0



This is called an integro-differential equation because it involves both derivatives
and integrals.

         Amplitude Equations
   Equations (2) and (3) completely specify the evolution of the system. Given the
current values of m ( R, t ) and X ( t ), (2) tells us how to update m and (3) tells us how
to update X. So no further equations are needed.
   If (2) and (3) truly describe the waterwheel’s behavior, there must be some pretty
complicated motions hidden in there. How can we extract them? The equations
appear much more intimidating than anything we’ve studied so far.
   A miracle occurs if we use Fourier analysis to rewrite the system. Watch!
   Since m ( R, t ) is periodic in R, we can write it as a Fourier series

                         ∞
          m(R, t ) = ∑ [an (t ) sin nR + bn (t ) cos nR ] .                                  (4)
                        n=0


By substituting this expression into (2) and (3), we’ll obtain a set of amplitude equa-
tions, ordinary differential equations for the amplitudes an, bn of the different har-
monics or modes. But first we must also write the inflow as a Fourier series:

                    ∞
          Q(R ) = ∑ qn cos nR.                                                               (5)
                   n=0


There are no sin nR terms in the series because water is added symmetrically at the
top of the wheel; the same inflow occurs at R and –R. (In this respect, the water-
wheel is unlike an ordinary, real-world waterwheel where asymmetry is used to
drive the wheel in the same direction at all times.)
   Substituting the series for m and Q into (2), we get

          ∂ ⎡∞                                   ⎤      ∂ ⎡∞                                   ⎤
              ⎢ ∑ an (t )sin nθ + bn (t ) cos nθ ⎥ = −ω     ⎢ ∑ an (t )sin nθ + bn (t ) cos nθ ⎥
          ∂t ⎢⎣ n=0                              ⎥⎦     ∂θ ⎢⎣ n=0                              ⎥⎦
                                                             ∞
                                                          +∑ qn cos nθ
                                                             n=0

                                                             ⎡∞                                 ⎤
                                                          −K ⎢ ∑ an (t )sin nθ + bn (t ) cos nθ ⎥ .
                                                             ⎢⎣ n=0                             ⎥⎦


316        LORENZ EQUATIONS
Now carry out the differentiations on both sides, and collect terms. By orthogo-
nality of the functions sin nR, cos nR, we can equate the coefficients of each har-
monic separately. For instance, the coefficient of sin nR on the left-hand side is an ,
and on the right it is nXbn  Kan . Hence

         an = nXbn − Kan .                                                             (6)
Similarly, matching coefficients of cos nR yields

         bn = −nXan − Kbn + qn .                                                       (7)
Both (6) and (7) hold for all n  0, 1, . . . .
  Next we rewrite (3) in terms of Fourier series. Get ready for the miracle. When
we substitute (4) into (3), only one term survives in the integral, by orthogonality:

                                  2π   ⎡∞                                 ⎤
         I ω = −vω + gr ∫             ⎢ ∑ an (t )sin nθ + bn (t ) cos nθ ⎥ sin θ d θ
                              0        ⎢⎣ n=0                             ⎥⎦
                                  2π
              = −vω + gr ∫             a1 sin2 θ d θ                                    (8)
                              0

              = −vω + π gra1 .

Hence, only a1 enters the differential equation for X . But then (6) and (7) imply
that a1, b1, and X form a closed system—these three variables are decoupled from all
the other an, bn, n v 1! The resulting equations are

         a1 = ωb1 − Ka1
         b = −ωa − Kb + q
          1        1      1            1                                                (9)
         ω = (−vω + π gra1 ) I .

(If you’re curious about the higher modes an, bn, n v 1, see Exercise 9.1.2.)
    We’ve simplified our problem tremendously: the original pair of integro-partial
differential equations (2), (3) has boiled down to the three-dimensional system
(9). It turns out that (9) is equivalent to the Lorenz equations! (See Exercise 9.1.3.)
Before we turn to that more famous system, let’s try to understand a little about
(9). No one has ever fully understood it—its behavior is fantastically complex—but
we can say something.

         Fixed Points
  We begin by finding the fixed points of (9). For notational convenience, the
usual asterisks will be omitted in the intermediate steps.
  Setting all the derivatives equal to zero yields

         a1  Xb1 / K                                                                   (10)



                                                       9.1   A CHAOTIC WATERWHEEL              317
         Xa1  q1 – Kb1                                                    (11)
         a1  vX / Qgr.                                                    (12)

Now solve for b1 by eliminating a1 from (10) and (11):

                  Kq1
         b1 =         .
                X +K2
                 2



Equating (10) and (12) yields Xb1 / K  vX / Qgr. Hence X  0 or

         b1  Kv / Qgr.                                                    (14)
Thus, there are two kinds of fixed point to consider:
         1. If X  0, then a1  0 and b1  q1 / K. This fixed point

                ( a1*, b1*, X* )  (0 , q l /K , 0)                        (15)
            corresponds to a state of no rotation; the wheel is at rest, with inflow
            balanced by leakage. We’re not saying that this state is stable, just that
            it exists; stability calculations will come later.
         2. If X v 0, then (13) and (14) imply b1  Kq1 / ( X2       K2 )  Kv / Qgr.
            Since K v 0, we get q1 / ( X 2     2
                                             K )  v / Qgr. Hence

                           π grq1
                ( ω*)2 =          − K 2.                                   (16)
                              v

            If the right-hand side of (16) is positive, there are two solutions, ±X*,
            corresponding to steady rotation in either direction. These solutions
            exist if and only if

                Qgrq1
                       1.                                                 (17)
                 K 2v

    The dimensionless group in (17) is called the Rayleigh number. It measures how
hard we’re driving the system, relative to the dissipation. More precisely, the ratio
in (17) expresses a competition between g and q1 (gravity and inflow, which tend to
spin the wheel), and K and v (leakage and damping, which tend to stop the wheel).
So it makes sense that steady rotation is possible only if the Rayleigh number is
large enough.
    The Rayleigh number appears in other parts of fluid mechanics, notably con-
vection, in which a layer of fluid is heated from below. There it is proportional to the
difference in temperature from bottom to top. For small temperature gradients,
heat is conducted vertically but the fluid remains motionless. When the Rayleigh
number increases past a critical value, an instability occurs—the hot fluid is less


318        LORENZ EQUATIONS
dense and begins to rise, while the cold fluid on top begins to sink. This sets up
a pattern of convection rolls, completely analogous to the steady rotation of our
waterwheel. With further increases of the Rayleigh number, the rolls become wavy
and eventually chaotic.
   The analogy to the waterwheel breaks down at still higher Rayleigh numbers,
when turbulence develops and the convective motion becomes complex in space
as well as time (Drazin and Reid 1981, Bergé et al. 1984, Manneville 1990). In con-
trast, the waterwheel settles into a pendulum-like pattern of reversals, turning
once to the left, then back to the right, and so on indefinitely (see Example 9.5.2).


9.2 Simple Properties of the Lorenz Equations
In this section we’ll follow in Lorenz’s footsteps. He took the analysis as far as pos-
sible using standard techniques, but at a certain stage he found himself confronted
with what seemed like a paradox. One by one he had eliminated all the known pos-
sibilities for the long-term behavior of his system: he showed that in a certain range
of parameters, there could be no stable fixed points and no stable limit cycles, yet
he also proved that all trajectories remain confined to a bounded region and are
eventually attracted to a set of zero volume. What could that set be? And how do
the trajectories move on it? As we’ll see in the next section, that set is the strange
attractor, and the motion on it is chaotic.
   But first we want to see how Lorenz ruled out the more traditional possibilities.
As Sherlock Holmes said in The Sign of Four, “When you have eliminated the
impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the truth.”
   The Lorenz equations are

         x = T( y − x )
         y = rx − y − xz                                                 (1)
         z = xy − bz.

Here T, r, b  0 are parameters: T is the Prandtl number, r is the Rayleigh number,
and b has no name. (In the convection problem it is related to the aspect ratio of
the rolls.)

         Nonlinearity
   The system (1) has only two nonlinearities, the quadratic terms xy and xz. This
should remind you of the waterwheel equations (9.1.9), which had two nonlineari-
ties, Xa1 and Xb1. See Exercise 9.1.3 for the change of variables that transforms the
waterwheel equations into the Lorenz equations.




                 9.2 SIMPLE PROPERTIES OF THE LORENZ EQUATIONS                     319
          Symmetry
    There is an important symmetry in the Lorenz equations. If we replace
( x,y ) l ( –x,–y ) in (1), the equations stay the same. Hence, if ( x ( t ), y ( t ), z ( t )) is a
solution, so is ( –x ( t ), –y ( t ), z ( t )). In other words, all solutions are either symmet-
ric themselves, or have a symmetric partner.

          Volume Contraction
    The Lorenz system is dissipative: volumes in phase space contract under the
flow. To see this, we must first ask: how do volumes evolve?
    Let’s answer the question in general, for any three-dimensional system x  f ( x ).
Pick an arbitrary closed surface S ( t ) of volume V ( t ) in phase space. Think of the
points on S as initial conditions for trajectories, and let them evolve for an infini-
tesimal time dt. Then S evolves into a new surface S ( t dt ); what is its volume
V ( t dt )?
    Figure 9.2.1 shows a side view of the volume.


                                         n
                                                          f


                                                                    S(t +dt)
                                         V(t)



                                                                 S(t)

                    Figure 9.2.1


Let n denote the outward normal on S. Since f is the instantaneous velocity of the
points, f ¸n is the outward normal component of velocity. Therefore in time dt a
patch of area dA sweeps out a volume ( f ¸n dt ) dA, as shown in Figure 9.2.2.



                          f.n dt {                   dA




                          Figure 9.2.2




320         LORENZ EQUATIONS
Hence

         V(t     dt )  V ( t )   (volume swept out by tiny patches of surface,
                                        integrated over all patches),

so we obtain

         V (t + dt ) = V (t ) + ∫ (f ⋅ n dt ) dA.
                                  S



Hence

              V (t + dt ) −V (t )
         V =                     = ∫ f ⋅ n dA.
                      dt             S



Finally, we rewrite the integral above by the divergence theorem, and get

         V = ∫ ∇⋅ f dV .                                                    (2)
                V



   For the Lorenz system,

                 ∂                 ∂                 ∂
          ∇⋅ f =    [T ( y − x )] + [rx − y − xz ] + [ xy − bz ]
                 ∂x                ∂y                ∂z
              = −T −1− b < 0.
Since the divergence is constant, (2) reduces to V = −(T + 1 + b )V , which has solu-
tion V ( t )  V (0) e–( T 1 b )t. Thus volumes in phase space shrink exponentially fast.
   Hence, if we start with an enormous solid blob of initial conditions, it eventually
shrinks to a limiting set of zero volume, like a balloon with the air being sucked
out of it. All trajectories starting in the blob end up somewhere in this limiting set;
later we’ll see it consists of fixed points, limit cycles, or for some parameter values,
a strange attractor.
   Volume contraction imposes strong constraints on the possible solutions of the
Lorenz equations, as illustrated by the next two examples.


EXAMPLE 9.2.1:

Show that there are no quasiperiodic solutions of the Lorenz equations.
   Solution: We give a proof by contradiction. If there were a quasiperiodic solu-
tion, it would have to lie on the surface of a torus, as discussed in Section 8.6, and
this torus would be invariant under the flow. Hence the volume inside the torus
would be constant in time. But this contradicts the fact that all volumes shrink
exponentially fast. ■



                    9.2 SIMPLE PROPERTIES OF THE LORENZ EQUATIONS                    321

