=== PDF pages 346-348 (printed 327-329) ===
The trajectory appears to cross itself repeatedly, but that’s just an artifact of pro-
jecting the three-dimensional trajectory onto a two-dimensional plane. In three
dimensions no self-intersections occur.
    Let’s try to understand Figure 9.3.2 in detail. The trajectory starts near the
origin, then swings to the right, and then dives into the center of a spiral on the
left. After a very slow spiral outward, the trajectory shoots back over to the right
side, spirals around a few times, shoots over to the left, spirals around, and so on
indefinitely. The number of circuits made on either side varies unpredictably from
one cycle to the next. In fact, the sequence of the number of circuits has many of
the characteristics of a random sequence. Physically, the switches between left and
right correspond to the irregular reversals of the waterwheel that we observed in
Section 9.1.
    When the trajectory is viewed in all three dimensions, rather than in a
two-dimensional projection, it appears to settle onto an exquisitely thin set that
looks like a pair of butterfly wings. Figure 9.3.3 shows a schematic of this strange
attractor (a term coined by Ruelle and Takens (1971)). This limiting set is the
attracting set of zero volume whose existence was deduced in Section 9.2.




              Figure 9.3.3 Abraham and Shaw (1983), p. 88


What is the geometrical structure of the strange attractor? Figure 9.3.3 suggests
that it is a pair of surfaces that merge into one in the lower portion of Figure 9.3.3.
But how can this be, when the uniqueness theorem (Section 6.2) tells us that tra-
jectories can’t cross or merge? Lorenz (1963) gives a lovely explanation—the two
surfaces only appear to merge. The illusion is caused by the strong volume con-
traction of the flow, and insufficient numerical resolution. But watch where that
idea leads him:

         It would seem, then, that the two surfaces merely appear to merge, and
         remain distinct surfaces. Following these surfaces along a path parallel to
         a trajectory, and circling C and C –, we see that each surface is really a
         pair of surfaces, so that, where they appear to merge, there are really four
         surfaces. Continuing this process for another circuit, we see that there are



                                9.3   CHAOS ON A STRANGE ATTRACTOR                327
          really eight surfaces, etc., and we finally conclude that there is an infinite
          complex of surfaces, each extremely close to one or the other of two merg-
          ing surfaces.

   Today this “infinite complex of surfaces” would be called a fractal. It is a set of
points with zero volume but infinite surface area. In fact, numerical experiments
suggest that it has a dimension of about 2.05! (See Example 11.5.1.) The amazing
geometric properties of fractals and strange attractors will be discussed in detail in
Chapters 11 and 12. But first we want to examine chaos a bit more closely.

          Exponential Divergence of Nearby Trajectories
    The motion on the attractor exhibits sensitive dependence on initial conditions.
This means that two trajectories starting very close together will rapidly diverge
from each other, and thereafter have totally different futures. Color Plate 2 vividly
illustrates this divergence by plotting the evolution of a small red blob of 10,000
nearby initial conditions. The blob eventually spreads over the whole attractor.
Hence nearby trajectories can end up anywhere on the attractor! The practical
implication is that long-term prediction becomes impossible in a system like this,
where small uncertainties are amplified enormously fast.
    Let’s make these ideas more precise. Suppose that we let transients decay, so
that a trajectory is “on” the attractor. Suppose x( t ) is a point on the attractor at
time t, and consider a nearby point, say x( t ) E ( t ), where E is a tiny separation
vector of initial length ||E 0 ||  10 –15, say (Figure 9.3.4).

                                                 x(t)


                                                        δ (t)


                                                 x(t) + δ (t)



                                  Figure 9.3.4


Now watch how E ( t ) grows. In numerical studies of the Lorenz attractor, one finds
that
          || E ( t ) || _ || E 0 || eMt

where M x 0.9. Hence neighboring trajectories separate exponentially fast.
Equivalently, if we plot ln ||E ( t ) || versus t, we find a curve that is close to a straight
line with a positive slope of M (Figure 9.3.5).




328         LORENZ EQUATIONS
                                                                      t

                             slope = λ


                 ln ||δ ||




                 Figure 9.3.5


We need to add some qualifications:
        1. The curve is never exactly straight. It has wiggles because the strength
           of the exponential divergence varies somewhat along the attractor.
        2. The exponential divergence must stop when the separation is compa-
           rable to the “diameter” of the attractor—the trajectories obviously
           can’t get any farther apart than that. This explains the leveling off or
           saturation of the curve in Figure 9.3.5.
        3. The number M is often called the Liapunov exponent, although this is a
           sloppy use of the term, for two reasons:
              First, there are actually n different Liapunov exponents for an
           n-dimensional system, defined as follows. Consider the evolution of an
           infinitesimal sphere of perturbed initial conditions. During its evolu-
           tion, the sphere will become distorted into an infinitesimal ellipsoid.
           Let E k ( t ), k  1, . . . , n, denote the length of the kth principal axis of
           the ellipsoid. Then δk (t ) _ δk ( 0 )eλk t , where the M k are the Liapunov
           exponents. For large t, the diameter of the ellipsoid is controlled by
           the most positive M k. Thus our M is actually the largest Liapunov
           exponent.
              Second, M depends (slightly) on which trajectory we study. We
           should average over many different points on the same trajectory to
           get the true value of M.
   When a system has a positive Liapunov exponent, there is a time horizon beyond
which prediction breaks down, as shown schematically in Figure 9.3.6. (See
Lighthill 1986 for a nice discussion.) Suppose we measure the initial conditions of
an experimental system very accurately. Of course, no measurement is perfect—
there is always some error ||E 0 || between our estimate and the true initial state.




                                9.3      CHAOS ON A STRANGE ATTRACTOR                329

=== PDF pages 392-395 (printed 373-376) ===
from  1 and eventually reaches 1. When this occurs, a flip bifurcation causes
each of the black dots to split in two; the 3-cycle doubles its period and becomes a
6-cycle. The same mechanism operates here as in the original period-doubling cas-
cade, but now produces orbits of period 3 •2n. A similar period-doubling cascade
can be found in all of the periodic windows.


10.5 Liapunov Exponent
We have seen that the logistic map can exhibit aperiodic orbits for certain param-
eter values, but how do we know that this is really chaos? To be called “chaotic,”
a system should also show sensitive dependence on initial conditions, in the sense
that neighboring orbits separate exponentially fast, on average. In Section 9.3 we
quantified sensitive dependence by defining the Liapunov exponent for a chaotic
differental equation. Now we extend the definition to one-dimensional maps.
   Here’s the intuition. Given some initial condition x0, consider a nearby point
x0 E 0, where the initial separation E 0 is extremely small. Let E n be the separation
after n iterates. If | E n | x | E 0 | enM , then M is called the Liapunov exponent. A positive
Liapunov exponent is a signature of chaos.
   A more precise and computationally useful formula for M can be derived. By
taking logarithms and noting that E n = f n ( x0 E 0 )  f n ( x0 ) , we obtain

                 1 δn
          λ≈      ln
                 n δ0
                 1    f n ( x0 + δ0 ) − f n ( x0 )
             =     ln
                 n                δ0
                 1
             =     ln ( f n )′( x0 )
                 n
where we’ve taken the limit E 0 l 0 in the last step. The term inside the logarithm
can be expanded by the chain rule:

                           n−1
          ( f n )′( x0 ) = ∏ f ′( xi ) .
                           i =0


(We’ve already seen this formula in Example 9.4.1, where it was derived by heuris-
tic reasoning about multipliers, and in Example 10.3.3, for the special case n 2.)
Hence

                 1 n−1
          M≈      ln ∏ f ′( xi )
                 n i =0
                 1 n−1
            =      ∑ ln f ′( xi ) .
                 n i =0

                                                     10.5 LIAPUNOV EXPONENT               373
If this expression has a limit as n ld, we define that limit to be the Liapunov
exponent for the orbit starting at x0:

                   ⎧⎪⎪ 1 n−1           ⎫⎪
          M = nlim
                → ∞⎪
                     ⎨ ∑ ln f ′( xi ) ⎪⎬ .
                     ⎪⎩ n i =0          ⎪⎪⎭

Note that M depends on x0. However, it is the same for all x0 in the basin of attrac-
tion of a given attractor. For stable fixed points and cycles, M is negative; for chaotic
attractors, M is positive.
   The next two examples deal with special cases where M can be found analytically.


EXAMPLE 10.5.1:

   Suppose that f has a stable p-cycle containing the point x0. Show that the
Liapunov exponent M 0. If the cycle is superstable, show that M d.
   Solution: As usual, we convert questions about p-cycles of f into questions
about fixed points of f p. Since x0 is an element of a p-cycle, x0 is a fixed point of f p.
By assumption, the cycle is stable; hence the multiplier ( f p )′( x0 )  1. Therefore
ln ( f p )′( x0 ) < ln(1) = 0, a result that we’ll use in a moment.
   Next observe that for a p-cycle,

                    ⎧⎪⎪ 1 n−1                  ⎫⎪
          M = nlim
                →∞ ⎨        ∑    ln f ′( xi ) ⎪⎬
                      ⎪⎪⎩ n i =0                ⎪⎪⎭
                 p−1
              1
            = ∑ ln f ′( xi )
              p i =0

since the same p terms keep appearing in the infinite sum. Finally, using the chain
rule in reverse, we obtain

          1 p−1                1
            ∑
          p i =0
                 ln f ′( xi ) = ln ( f p )′( x0 ) < 0,
                               p

as desired. If the cycle is superstable, then ( f p )′( x0 )  0 by definition, and thus
     1
M = ln( 0 ) = −∞. ■
     p


   The second example concerns the tent map, defined by

                     ⎧⎪rx,      0 ≤ x ≤ 12
          f ( x ) = ⎪⎨
                      ⎪⎪r − rx, 12 ≤ x ≤ 1
                       ⎩

for 0 br b2 and 0 bx b1 (Figure 10.5.1).



374        ONE-DIMENSIONAL MAPS
                                     1

                                 r
                                 2

                             xn +1




                                         0                          1
                                                    xn

                             Figure 10.5.1


Because it is piecewise linear, the tent map is far easier to analyze than the logistic
map.


EXAMPLE 10.5.2:

   Show that M ln r for the tent map, independent of the initial condition x0.
                                                               ⎪⎧⎪ 1 n−1                 ⎪⎫
                                                            →∞ ⎪ ∑
   Solution: Since f a ( x ) o r for all x, we find M = nlim   ⎨         ln f ′( xi ) ⎪⎬ ln r.■
                                                                 ⎪⎩ n i =0                ⎪⎪⎭


Example 10.5.2 suggests that the tent map has chaotic solutions for all r 1, since
M ln r 0. In fact, the dynamics of the tent map can be understood in detail,
even in the chaotic regime; see Devaney (1989).
   In general, one needs to use a computer to calculate Liapunov exponents. The
next example outlines such a calculation for the logistic map.


EXAMPLE 10.5.3:

     Describe a numerical scheme to compute M for the logistic map
  f ( x ) rx ( 1  x ) . Graph the results as a function of the control parameter r, for
3brb4.
     Solution: Fix some value of r. Then, starting from a random initial condition,
iterate the map long enough to allow transients to decay, say 300 iterates or so.
Next compute a large number of additional iterates, say 10,000. You only need to
store the current value of xn, not all the previous iterates. Compute
 ln f ′( xn ) = ln r − 2rxn and add it to the sum of the previous logarithms. The
Liapunov exponent is then obtained by dividing the grand total by 10,000. Repeat
this procedure for the next r, and so on. The end result should look like Figure 10.5.2.




                                                    10.5 LIAPUNOV EXPONENT                     375
                  1·0



                  0·5



             λ      0




                 −0·5



                 −1·0
                    3·0       3·2         3·4         3·6     3·8   4·0
                                                 r
             Figure 10.5.2 Olsen and Degn ( 1985 ) , p. 175


   Comparing this graph to the orbit diagram (Figure 10.2.7), we notice that M
remains negative for r < r∞ ≈ 3.57, and approaches zero at the period-doubling
bifurcations. The negative spikes correspond to the 2n -cycles. The onset of chaos is
visible near r x 3.57, where M first becomes positive. For r 3.57 the Liapunov
exponent generally increases, except for the dips caused by the windows of peri-
odic behavior. Note the large dip due to the period-3 window near r 3.83. ■

   Actually, all the dips in Figure 10.5.2 should drop down to M d , because a
superstable cycle is guaranteed to occur somewhere near the middle of each dip,
and such cycles have M d, by Example 10.5.1. This part of the spike is too nar-
row to be resolved in Figure 10.5.2.


10.6      Universality and Experiments
This section deals with some of the most astonishing results in all of nonlinear
dynamics. The ideas are best introduced by way of an example.


EXAMPLE 10.6.1:

  Plot the graph of the sine map xn + 1 r sinQxn for 0 br b1 and 0 bx b1, and
compare it to the logistic map. Then plot the orbit diagrams for both maps, and list
some similarities and differences.
  Solution: The graph of the sine map is shown in Figure 10.6.1.



376       ONE-DIMENSIONAL MAPS

