=== PDF pages 370-375 (printed 355-360) ===
   These equations were proposed by Rikitake (1958) as a model for the self-gen-
eration of the Earth’s magnetic field by large current-carrying eddies in the core.
Computer experiments show that the model exhibits chaotic solutions for some
parameter values. These solutions are loosely analogous to the irregular reversals
of the Earth’s magnetic field inferred from geological data. See Cox (1982) for the
geophysical background.

9.3 Chaos on a Strange Attractor
9.3.1     (Quasiperiodicity v chaos) The trajectories of the quasiperiodic system
 
θ1  ω1 , θ2  ω2 , ( X / X  irrational) are not periodic.
a) Why isn’t this system considered chaotic?
b) Without using a computer, find the largest Liapunov exponent for the system.
(Numerical experiments) For each of the values of r given below, use a computer to
explore the dynamics of the Lorenz system, assuming T  10 and b  8 / 3 as usual.
In each case, plot x ( t ), y ( t ), and x vs. z. You should investigate the consequences
of choosing different initial conditions and lengths of integration. Also, in some
cases you may want to ignore the transient behavior, and plot only the sustained
long-term behavior.
9.3.2    r  10                                 9.3.3     r  22 (transient chaos)
9.3.4    r  24.5                               9.3.5     r  100 (surprise)
         (chaos and stable point co-exist)
9.3.6    r  126.52                             9.3.7     r  400
9.3.8    (Practice with the definition of an attractor) Consider the following famil-
iar system in polar coordinates: r = r( l − r 2 ), R  1 . Let D be the disk x 2 y 2 b 1.
a) Is D an invariant set?
b) Does D attract an open set of initial conditions?
c) Is D an attractor? If not, why not? If so, find its basin of attraction.
d) Repeat part (c) for the circle x 2 y 2  1.
9.3.9    (Exponential divergence) Using numerical integration of two nearby tra-
jectories, estimate the largest Liapunov exponent for the Lorenz system, assuming
that the parameters have their standard values r  28, T  10, b  8 / 3.
9.3.10 (Time horizon) To illustrate the “time horizon” after which prediction
becomes impossible, numerically integrate the Lorenz equations for r  28,
T  10, b  8 / 3. Start two trajectories from nearby initial conditions, and plot x ( t )
for both of them on the same graph.

9.4 Lorenz Map
9.4.1    (Computer work) Using numerical integration, compute the Lorenz map
for r  28, T  10, b  8 3.


                                                                    EXERCISES         351
9.4.2    (Tent map, as model of Lorenz map) Consider the map

                 ⎧⎪ 2 x ,       0 ≤ xn ≤ 12
         xn+1 = ⎪⎨ n
                  ⎪⎪⎩2 − 2 xn , 12 ≤ xn ≤ 1

as a simple analytical model of the Lorenz map.
a) Why is it called the “tent map”?
b) Find all the fixed points, and classify their stability.
c) Show that the map has a period-2 orbit. Is it stable or unstable?
d) Can you find any period-3 points? How about period-4? If so, are the corre-
   sponding periodic orbits stable or unstable?

9.5 Exploring Parameter Space
(Numerical experiments) For each of the values of r given below, use a computer
to explore the dynamics of the Lorenz system, assuming T  10 and b  8 3 as
usual. In each case, plot x ( t ), y ( t ), and x vs. z.
9.5.1    r  166.3 (intermittent chaos)
9.5.2    r  212 (noisy periodicity)
9.5.3    the interval 145  r  166 (period-doubling)
9.5.4    (Hysteresis between a fixed point and a strange attractor) Consider the
Lorenz equations with T  10 and b  8 / 3. Suppose that we slowly “turn the r
knob” up and down. Specifically, let r  24.4 sin Xt, where X is small compared
to typical orbital frequencies on the attractor. Numerically integrate the equa-
tions, and plot the solutions in whatever way seems most revealing. You should see
a striking hysteresis effect between an equilibrium and a chaotic state.
9.5.5    (Lorenz equations for large r ) Consider the Lorenz equations in the limit
r l d. By taking the limit in a certain way, all the dissipative terms in the equa-
tions can be removed (Robbins 1979, Sparrow 1982).
a) Let F  r –1 / 2, so that r l d corresponds to F l 0. Find a change of variables
   involving F such that as F l 0, the equations become

        Xa  Y
        Ya  –XZ
        Za  XY.

b) Find two conserved quantities (i.e., constants of the motion) for the new system.
c) Show that the new system is volume-preserving (i.e., the volume of an arbitrary
   blob of “phase fluid” is conserved by the time-evolution of the system, even
   though the shape of the blob may change dramatically.)
d) Explain physically why the Lorenz equations might be expected to show some
   conservative features in the limit r l d.

352       LORENZ EQUATIONS
e) Solve the system in part (a) numerically. What is the long-term behavior? Does
   it agree with the behavior seen in the Lorenz equations for large r?
9.5.6     (Transient chaos) Example 9.5.1 shows that the Lorenz system can exhibit
transient chaos for r  21, T  10, b  83 . However, not all trajectories behave this
way. Using numerical integration, find three different initial conditions for which
there is transient chaos, and three others for which there isn’t. Give a rule of thumb
which predicts whether an initial condition will lead to transient chaos or not.

9.6 Using Chaos to Send Secret Messages
9.6.1     (Exponentially fast synchronization) The Liapunov function of Example 9.6.1
shows that the synchronization error e( t ) tends to zero as t l d, but it does not
provide information about the rate of convergence. Sharpen the argument to show
that the synchronization error e ( t ) decays exponentially fast.
a) Prove that V = 12 e2 2 + 2e32 decays exponentially fast, by showing V ≤ −kV ,
   for some constant k  0 to be determined.
b) Show that part (a) implies that e2 ( t ), e3 ( t ) l 0 exponentially fast.
c) Finally show that e1 ( t ) l 0 exponentially fast.
9.6.2    (Pecora and Carroll’s approach) In the pioneering work of Pecora and
Carroll (1990), one of the receiver variables is simply set equal to the corresponding
transmitter variable. For instance, if x ( t ) is used as the transmitter drive signal,
then the receiver equations are

         x(t)  x(t)
          yr = rx(t ) − yr − x(t )zr
          zr = x(t ) yr − bzr

where the first equation is not a differential equation. Their numerical simulations
and a heuristic argument suggested that yr ( t ) l y ( t ) and zr ( t ) l z ( t ) as t ld,
even if there were differences in the initial conditions.
   Here is a simple proof of that result, due to He and Vaidya (1992).
a) Show that the error dynamics are

          e1 ≡ 0
          e2 = −e2 − x(t )e3
          e3 = x(t )e2 − be3

   where e1  x – xr, e2  y – yr, and e3 = z − zr .
b) Show that V = e22 + e32 is a Liapunov function.
c) What do you conclude?




                                                                   EXERCISES          353
9.6.3    (Computer experiments on synchronized chaos) Let x, y, z be governed
by the Lorenz equations with r  60, T  10, b  8 / 3. Let xr , yr , zr be governed by
the system in Exercise 9.6.2. Choose different initial conditions for y and yr, and
similarly for z and zr , and then start integrating numerically.
a) Plot y ( t ) and yr ( t ) on the same graph. With any luck, the two time series should
   eventually merge, even though both are chaotic.
b) Plot the ( y,z ) projection of both trajectories.
9.6.4    (Some drives don’t work) Suppose z ( t ) were the drive signal in Exercise 9.6.2,
instead of x ( t ). In other words, we replace zr by z ( t ) everywhere in the receiver
equations, and watch how xr and yr evolve.
a) Show numerically that the receiver does not synchronize in this case.
b) What if y ( t ) were the drive?
9.6.5    (Masking) In their signal-masking approach, Cuomo and Oppenheim
(1992, 1993) use the following receiver dynamics:

           x r = T( yr − xr )
           yr = rs(t ) − yr − s(t )zr
           zr = s(t ) yr − bzr

where s ( t )  x ( t ) m ( t ), and m ( t ) is the low-power message added to the much
stronger chaotic mask x ( t ). If the receiver has synchronized with the drive, then
xr ( t ) x x ( t ) and so m ( t ) may be recovered as m      ˆ (t ) = s(t ) − xr (t ). Test this
approach numerically, using a sine wave for m ( t ). How close is the estimate m            ˆ (t )
to the actual message m ( t )? How does the error depend on the frequency of the
sine wave?
9.6.6   (Lorenz circuit) Derive the circuit equations for the transmitter circuit
shown in Figures 9.6.1.




354         LORENZ EQUATIONS
    10
          ONE-DIMENSIONAL MAPS




10.0      Introduction
This chapter deals with a new class of dynamical systems in which time is discrete,
rather than continuous. These systems are known variously as difference equa-
tions, recursion relations, iterated maps, or simply maps.
    For instance, suppose you repeatedly press the cosine button on your cal-
culator, starting from some number x0 . Then the successive readouts are
x1 cos x0, x2 cos x1, and so on. Set your calculator to radian mode and try
it. Can you explain the surprising result that emerges after many iterations?
    The rule xn l cos xn is an example of a one-dimensional map, so-called because
the points xn belong to the one-dimensional space of real numbers. The sequence
x0, x1, x2, . . . is called the orbit starting from x0 .
    Maps arise in various ways:
         1. As tools for analyzing differential equations. We have already encoun-
            tered maps in this role. For instance, Poincaré maps allowed us to
            prove the existence of a periodic solution for the driven pendulum and
            Josephson junction (Section 8.5), and to analyze the stability of peri-
            odic solutions in general (Section 8.7). The Lorenz map (Section 9.4)
            provided strong evidence that the Lorenz attractor is truly strange,
            and is not just a long-period limit cycle.
         2. As models of natural phenomena. In some scientific contexts it is natu-
            ral to regard time as discrete. This is the case in digital electronics, in
            parts of economics and finance theory, in impulsively driven mechani-
            cal systems, and in the study of certain animal populations where suc-
            cessive generations do not overlap.
         3. As simple examples of chaos. Maps are interesting to study in their own
            right, as mathematical laboratories for chaos. Indeed, maps are capable



                                                    10.0 INTRODUCTION             355
             of much wilder behavior than differential equations because the points
             xn hop along their orbits rather than flow continuously (Figure 10.0.1).




                      x0        x2                                    x1

              Figure 10.0.1


   The study of maps is still in its infancy, but exciting progress has been made
in the last few decades, thanks to the growing availability of calculators, then
computers, and now computer graphics. Maps are easy and fast to simulate on
digital computers where time is inherently discrete. Such computer experiments
have revealed a number of unexpected and beautiful patterns, which in turn have
stimulated new theoretical developments. Most surprisingly, maps have generated
a number of successful predictions about the routes to chaos in semiconductors,
convecting fluids, heart cells, lasers, and chemical oscillators.
   We discuss some of the properties of maps and the techniques for analyzing
them in Sections 10.1–10.5. The emphasis is on period-doubling and chaos in the
logistic map. Section 10.6 introduces the amazing idea of universality, and summa-
rizes experimental tests of the theory. Section 10.7 is an attempt to convey the basic
ideas of Feigenbaum’s renormalization technique.
   As usual, our approach will be intuitive. For rigorous treatments of
one-dimensional maps, see Devaney (1989) and Collet and Eckmann (1980).


10.1 Fixed Points and Cobwebs
In this section we develop some tools for analyzing one-dimensional maps of the
form xn l f ( xn ) , where f is a smooth function from the real line to itself.

          A Pedantic Point
    When we say “map,” do we mean the function f or the difference equation
xn 1 f ( xn ) ? Following common usage, we’ll call both of them maps. If you’re
disturbed by this, you must be a pure mathematician . . . or should consider
becoming one!

          Fixed Points and Linear Stability
    Suppose x * satisfies f ( x * ) x *. Then x * is a fixed point, for if xn x * then
xn 1 f ( xn ) f ( x * )  x * ; hence the orbit remains at x * for all future iterations.
    To determine the stability of x *, we consider a nearby orbit xn x * I n and
ask whether the orbit is attracted to or repelled from x *. That is, does the deviation
I n grow or decay as n increases? Substitution yields



356        ONE-DIMENSIONAL MAPS

